The Plasma Environment of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko

    Charlotte Goetz1,2 · Etienne Behar3,4 ·Arnaud Beth5 ·Dennis Bodewits6 ·
    Steve Bromley6 ·Jim Burch7 ·Jan Deca8 ·Andrey Divin9 ·Anders I. Eriksson10 ·
    Paul D. Feldman11 · Marina Galand12 ·Herbert Gunell5 · Pierre Henri4,13 ·
    Kevin Heritier12 ·Geraint H. Jones14,15 · Kathleen E. Mandt16 ·Hans Nilsson3 ·
    John W. Noonan17 · Elias Odelstad10 ·Joel W. Parker18 · Martin Rubin19 ·
    Cyril Simon Wedlund20 · Peter Stephenson12 · Matthew G. G. T. Taylor1 ·
    Erik Vigren10 · Sarah K. Vines21 · Martin Volwerk20

Received: 3 May 2021 / Accepted: 20 October 2022 / Published online: 10
November 2022 © The Author(s) 2022

Abstract

The environment of a comet is a fascinating and unique laboratory to
study plasma processes and the formation of structures such as shocks
and discontinuities from electron scales to ion scales and above. The
European Space Agency’s Rosetta mission collected data for more than two
years, from the rendezvous with comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko in
August 2014 until the final touch-down of the spacecraft end of
September 2016. This escort phase spanned a large arc of the comet’s
orbit around the Sun, including its perihelion and corresponding to
heliocentric distances between 3.8 AU and 1.24 AU. The length of the
active mission together with this span in heliocentric and cometocentric
distances make the Rosetta data set unique and much richer than sets
obtained with previous cometary probes. Here, we review the results from
the Rosetta mission that pertain to the plasma environment. We detail
all known sources and losses of the plasma and typical processes within
it. The findings from in-situ plasma measurements are complemented by
remote observations of emissions from the plasma. Overviews of the
methods and instruments used in the study are given as well as a short
review of the Rosetta mission. The long duration of the Rosetta mission
provides the opportunity to better understand how the importance of
these processes changes depending on parameters like the outgassing rate
and the solar wind conditions. We discuss how the shape and existence of
large scale structures depend on these parameters and how the plasma
within different regions of the plasma environment can be characterised.
We end with a non-exhaustive list of still open questions, as well as
suggestions on how to answer them in the future.

1 Introduction

The past several years have brought incredible advancements in our
understanding of the plasma around comets, largely thanks to the
European Space Agency’s Rosetta spacecraft. Its two year mission
orbiting comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko (67P) has provided a

Fig. 1 Closest approach distance vs gas production rate for the
spacecraft that have visited comets. The gas production rate was derived
from in-situ observations. The shaded, red area indicates the
approximate range of distances and gas production rates covered by
Rosetta during its two year mission. Abbreviations: GZ:
21P/Giacobini-Zinner, ICE: International Cometary Explorer, DS1: Deep
Space 1, GS: 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup. Values are from Gringauz et
al. (1986b), Johnstone et al. (1993), Richter et al. (2011), Goetz
(2019), Cowley (1987)

large amount of observations of the nucleus and its environment over
approximately half of the comet’s orbit. It has allowed, for the first
time, to study the evolution of the neutral and plasma environment from
a relatively inactive stage to a full-fledged cometary coma. With the
touchdown of the lander Philae on the surface and the eventual descent
of Rosetta to the nucleus, this is also the closest a spacecraft has
ever come to a comet while observing the plasma.

Other comets have been visited before, most famously, an armada of
spacecraft flew by comet 1P/Halley in 1986. Figure 1 shows an
approximate overview of the gas production rates of the visited comets
and the closest approach distance of the spacecraft. It becomes clear
that Rosetta is unique in the sense that it is covering not only a large
range of distances and gas production rates, but it also covers a
previously largely unexplored region of the parameter space. Thus, this
paper shall focus on the new results obtained by Rosetta and the reader
is referred to earlier works such as Festou et al. (2004) and Grewing et
al. (1988) for results from other missions. Figure 2 shows an overview
of what the plasma environment of comets was thought to look like before
Rosetta arrived at comet 67P. We will detail below when this previous
picture is most applicable to the situation at 67P and when it needs to
be revised so as to reflect the uniqueness of the new measurements.

The comet underwent large variations in gas production rate and
heliocentric distance, as it travelled through the solar system,
approached the Sun with perihelion on 13 August 2015 and then moved
towards the outer solar system again. Therefore, it is advantageous to
define certain stages in the comet’s development. This aids in defining
common parameters that are comparable between pre- and post-perihelion
times, it should be noted though, that the demarcation between these
stages is fluid and they can often be observed within hours of each
other. Three stages are used: the weakly, intermediately and strongly
active stage.

The strongly active stage for gas production rates Q > 5 × 1027 s−1 is
perhaps the most recognizable, as this is a stage that is most
comparable to the plasma around previously visited comets like
1P/Halley. Here, traditional fluid-like plasma models can describe the
interaction quite well on large scales, however many differences remain
between this stage and the extremely active comets represented by
1P/Halley. Comet 67P was in this stage from approximately June 2016 to
November 2016. The intermediately active stage for 1026 < Q < 5 × 1027
s−1 (approx. pre-perihelion January 2015 to May 2015 and post-perihelion
December 2015 to April 2016) is characterized by an interplay of fluid
effects and finite ion

Fig. 2 View of the interaction pre-Rosetta, for a highly active comet
such as 1P/Halley. The Sun is on the right, and B denote the solar wind
flow velocity and the interplanetary magnetic field. The comet is
outgassing water that is quickly turned into . The water ions expand
from the comet and create an inner shock where the expansion speed
exceeds the acoustic speed. A diamagnetic cavity is formed and the
interplanetary magnetic field drapes around the inner coma. The solar
wind flow is deflected. For more details see Coates and Jones (2009)

gyroradius effects and gives rise to a host of new phenomena never
explored before. The weakly active stage with s-1 is marked by large ion
gyroradius effects and very limited fluid-like behaviour. This stage is
observable from August 2014 to end of 2014 and from May 2016 to
September 2016.

The old view on cometary plasma environments shown in Fig. 2 is most
applicable at the high activity stage, although, as will be explored in
this review, even then remarkable differences can be found. For a
general overview of high activity comets see for example Cravens and
Gombosi (2004), Gombosi (2015) or Ip (2004).

While these three activity stages provide a rough classification for the
important spatial scales at a comet, there are also effects on smaller
scales that play a role. For example, space charge effects can create
significant large scale electric fields, and there are waves on both
electron and ion time scales that affect e.g. plasma heating and energy
transport. Therefore, a comet offers a unique opportunity to study
plasma physics at scales both great and small, as well as cross-scale
effects.

To observe the plasma environment and its sources and dynamics, Rosetta
carries a bespoke suite of plasma instruments as well as a neutral gas
monitor and an EUV spectrometer. All data and user guides describing
data treatment and caveats may be found on the Planetary Science Archive
(PSA1). These provide the basis for most of the new findings detailed
later on.

The aim of this review is to provide a comprehensive overview of the
recent advances in cometary plasma physics, with the focus on the plasma
around comet 67P. First, we will address the physical processes that
lead to the formation of a neutral and ionized coma (Sect. 2). The
processes that distribute energy and momentum throughout the regions
will be discussed, as well as the impact on emissions, chemistry and
dust. Then, in Sect. 3, follows a short introduction into observations,
specifically those made by Rosetta (Sect. 3.1.1), and the methods
commonly used to interpret them. Lastly, we focus on the macroscopic
structures

&lt;sup>1https://www.cosmos.esa.int/web/psa/psa-introduction.

65 Page 4 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

and large regions with similar plasma parameters that could be observed
(Sect. 4). We close with an overview of remaining open questions and an
outlook to future investigations in Sect. 5.

2 Plasma

2.1 Plasma Sources

Fundamentally, there are two particle populations that shape the
behaviour of the plasma at a comet: the neutral gas background and the
incoming solar wind plasma. Any variation in parameters of either will
have consequences on plasma processes, structures and boundaries. Thus,
the better the understanding of the underlying parameters, the more we
can learn about the cometary plasma.

2.1.1 Neutral Background

Upon arrival at comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, its neutral gas coma
was revealed by the various instruments on board Rosetta. A host of
volatiles has been detected by the payload instruments on Rosetta and
the lander Philae, namely by ROSINA (Rosetta Orbiter Spectrometer for
Ion and Neutral Analysis, Balsiger et al. 2007), VIRTIS (Visible and
InfraRed Thermal Imaging Spectrometer, Coradini et al. 2007), MIRO
(Microwave Instrument for the Rosetta Orbiter, Gulkis et al. 2007),
Alice (Stern et al. 2007), Ptolemy (Wright et al. 2007), and COSAC
(Cometary Sampling and Composition experiment, Goesmann et al. 2007).

Outgassing of H2O, the major volatile, and a suite of lesser abundant
species were measured by several instruments. VIRTIS detected H2O, CO2,
CH4, and OCS (Bockelée-Morvan et al. 2016). MIRO observed H2O, CO,
CH3OH, and NH3 (Biver et al. 2019). Measurements from Alice inferred the
presence of H2O, CO2, and O2 (Keeney et al. 2017; Feldman et al. 2015).
ROSINA detected the most abundant species H2O, CO2, CO, and O2 (Hässig
et al. 2015; Bieler et al. 2015a). Also a host of other volatiles have
been detected; however, their density abundances were generally low at
the few percent level or even below (Le Roy et al. 2015). A complete
list can be found in Altwegg et al. (2019) and Rubin et al. (2019). A
subset of these species were also observed by the lander payload
instruments Ptolemy (Wright et al. 2015) and COSAC (Goesmann et
al. 2015) near the surface of the comet on 12 November 2014.

The obliquity of the comet’s rotation axis of 52 degrees combined with
its complex bilobed shape (Sierks et al. 2015) led to a strong seasonal
outgassing pattern (Hässig et al. 2015) and therefore a highly
heterogeneous gas coma. Early on in the mission, beyond 3 AU from the
Sun, the subsolar point was above the northern hemisphere. Inbound
equinox occurred in May 2015 and started a short but intense summer in
the south for the few months around perihelion in August 2015 at 1.24 AU
until the outbound equinox in March 2016. H2O seemed to follow the
seasonal illumination on the comet’s nucleus (Bieler et al. 2015b;
Fougere et al. 2016a; Marschall et al. 2016, 2017). Species of higher
volatility, on the other hand, were released more uniformly in the case
of CO whereas CO2 release was enhanced above the southern hemisphere
(Fougere et al. 2016b; Biver et al. 2019). O2 on the other hand (Bieler
et al. 2015a) exhibited a strong correlation with water, despite the
vastly different sublimation temperature of the pure ice equivalents.
Corresponding trapping and release experiments in the lab showed the
same outcome (Laufer et al. 2018).

Averaged over the whole Rosetta mission the southern hemisphere was the
origin for the major part of the total outgassing (Läuter et al. 2019)
and was thus subject to larger degrees of erosion (Keller et al. 2017).
The northern hemisphere, on the other hand, shows smooth terrain, most
likely the result of back-fall of wet grains (Rubin et al. 2014a; Thomas
et al. 2015) that occurred over the previous perihelion passages. It is
still debated to which degree this material, as opposed to the fresh
material in the south, exhibited lower abundances of highly volatile
species, possibly due to outgassing occurring during the transport from
the south to the north. Nevertheless, there are indications that wet
grains did act as distributed sources (De Keyser et al. 2017), even
though their importance in terms of the total outgassing remained
limited (Biver et al. 2019).

Rosetta monitored the total activity of the comet throughout the
perihelion passage. Hansen et al. (2016) and Combi et al. (2020)
presented the evolution of the water production rate based on the Direct
Simulation Monte Carlo model by Fougere et al. (2016a), starting from
Rosetta’s arrival at the comet in August 2014 all the way to the
outbound equinox in March 2016. Figure 3 shows the water production rate
reproduced from Hansen et al. (2016). Within this time frame the water
outgassing varied by approximately 3 orders of magnitude, with a peak
water production on the order of 1028 s−1 some 2 to 3 weeks after the 13
August 2015 perihelion passage based on Rosetta measurements of MIRO
(Marshall et al. 2017), VIRTIS (Bockelée-Morvan et al. 2015, 2016),
ROSINA (Hansen et al. 2016; Läuter et al. 2019; Combi et al. 2020),
RPC-ICA (Simon Wedlund et al. 2016), and observations of the Lyman Alpha
Imaging Camera (LAICA) on the PROCYON (Proximate Object Close Flyby with
Optical Navigation) spacecraft (Shinnaka et al. 2017). Hansen et
al. (2016) furthermore showed that ground-based measurements of 67P’s
dust brightness (Snodgrass et al. 2016) revealed a dust activity pattern
very similar to the neutral gas.

As shown in Fig. 3, Simon Wedlund et al. (2016), and later Simon Wedlund
et al. (2019a), have shown that it is possible to use the ion
spectrometer RPC-ICA on board Rosetta as a remote sensing tool to infer
the neutral outgassing rate2 from the knowledge of local solar wind
charge-exchange processes (see also Sect. 3.2). Fluxes of solar wind
He2+ ions were first compared to those of He+ ions, their
charge-exchanged counterpart. This ratio was used in combination with
up-to-date H2O charge-transfer cross sections (Simon Wedlund et
al. 2019) and an evaluation of the column density along the Sun-comet
line based on the classic model of Haser (1957). The so-called Haser
model simply assumes a spherically-symmetric homogeneous outgassing of
species s at a constant neutral radial velocity Un,s (m s−1):

(1) 

where ns is the neutral density of species s (m−3), Q0,s the total
outgassing rate (s−1), r and rc the cometocentric distance and nucleus
radius, assumed spherical symmetric (in m), and kp,s is the total
photo-destruction rate (photo-ionisation and photo-dissociation, in s−1)
of species s. Marshall et al. (2019) pointed out that outgassing
retrievals based on this simple Haser model can only accidentally be
predictive since comet 67P’s outgassing is highly asymmetric and depends
on nucleus shape,3 spin axis, and activity distribution at the surface
(as it is the case for many other cometary objects). However, because
charge exchange is a

3In the case of 67P, a very irregular shape indeed, with two lobes of
different radii. This is not an untypical feature as other comets, such
as 1P/Halley, 8P/Tuttle, 19P/Borrely and 103P/Hartley 2, all exhibit a
similar irregular shape, likely formed from slow collisions between
primordial rubber piles in the early solar system (a so-called “contact
binary”, see Davidsson et al. 2016).

2Or, interchangeably, production rate.

65 Page 6 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 3 Water production rate as a function of heliocentric distance
reproduced from Hansen et al. (2016), Fig. 9. The results from several
Rosetta instruments have been added and include ROSINA (blue diamonds;
Hansen et al. 2016), VIRTIS (green triangles; Bockelée-Morvan et
al. 2015; Fink et al. 2016; Fougere et al. 2016a), RPC/ICA (red
triangles; Simon Wedlund et al. 2016), MIRO (yellow circles; Biver et
al. 2015; Lee et al. 2015), and the scaled dust brightness from
ground-based observations for comparison (tan crosses; Snodgrass et
al. 2016)

cumulative process and depends on the integrated column of atmosphere
along the line of sight:

(2) 

where ncol,s is the column density (in m−2) and χ (in radian) is the
solar zenith angle (Beth et al. 2016), the approach may still be valid
outside of times when Rosetta went much deeper into the atmosphere of
the comet, and outgassing asymmetries became dominant. The local
outgassing retrievals based on solar wind ion charge exchange were shown
to be within a factor 2–3 on average of the MIRO and ROSINA-COPS
observations, especially if the values were averaged over more than a
full comet’s rotation (Simon Wedlund et al. 2019b) as shown in Fig. 3.

A similar analysis as that of Hansen et al. (2016), based on an analytic
outgassing model, has been performed by Läuter et al. (2019) for the
four major species H2O, CO2, CO, and O2. The different models show
consistent results and reveal asymmetries in the outgassing behaviour
inbound and outbound as a function of heliocentric distance. This is in
line with the results presented by Gasc et al. (2017): a steeper
decrease of water compared to more volatile species such as CO and CO2
has been observed. Independent of whether the individual species’
production rates are integrated over the whole Rosetta mission or
studied close to their peak production near perihelion, water is the
dominant volatile followed by carbon dioxide (Bockelée-Morvan et
al. 2016; Läuter et al. 2019; Combi et al. 2020).

2.1.2 Solar Wind

An important input parameter for the plasma at 67P is the solar wind.
Changes in its key parameters affect e.g. boundaries, plasma production
and loss, magnetic field direction and

Fig. 4 Estimate of the solar wind parameters at 67P during the Rosetta
mission. From top to bottom: magnetic field magnitude, Parker angle,
density, speed. We show the results of three different propagation
models, description see text. From Goetz (2019)

magnitude (see also Sect. 2.4). Thus it is opportune to introduce key
parameters for the solar wind that comet 67P encountered while
accompanied by the Rosetta spacecraft.

Figure 4 shows estimations of key parameters from different models of
the solar wind at the location of the comet. Unfortunately, the Rosetta
mission was not equipped with a dedicated upstream solar wind monitor,
and after its arrival never left the sphere of influence of the comet,
thus no measurements of the undisturbed solar wind are available.

The three models shown here are:

- 1.  a simple Parker model (Parker 1958), based on a fixed set of
      conditions at Earth: B = 6 nT, v = 400 km/s θ = 45◦ and n = 8
      cm−3. These are then simply extrapolated to the comet’s position,
- 2.  the Tao model (Tao et al. 2005), a 1D MHD model that propagates
      solar wind measurements made at Earth to the comet. For the
      magnetic field only the tangential component is computed, so a
      calculation of the Parker angle, which is the angle between the
      solar wind velocity and the magnetic field direction, is not
      possible, and
- 3.  a simple model also based on Earth-based observations of the solar
      wind (OMNI dataset), that uses the Parker (1958) approach to
      compute the values at the location of the comet.

Other sources are also available, e.g., the ENLIL (Odstrcil 2003) and
mSWiM (Zieger and Hansen 2008) models, with similar results as the OMNI
and Tao models. An important limitation of the propagation is the
angular separation between the source data set and the point at which
the solar wind is to be predicted. Here, the separation angle of the two
points in the solar system can give an estimate of the goodness of the
predicted values. Figure 5 shows this angle for the case Earth-67P and
Mars-67P. It becomes clear that for most of the Rosetta mission, Mars is
closer to 67P than Earth and therefore e.g. MAVEN and Mars Express data
are more suitable as a source for solar wind models. Two exceptions are
the periods in August 2014 and in early 2016, where Earth and 67P were
almost aligned.

From the propagation models we can derive typical characteristics of the
solar wind at 67P. The first panel of Fig. 4 shows the magnetic field.
It is clear that the closer the comet

65 Page 8 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 5 Separation angle between Earth and comet 67P and Mars and 67P for
the duration of the comet phase of the Rosetta mission

comes to the Sun, the higher the field magnitude. In the observation
based models, the variability is of the order of 5 nT. A clear
dependence on the solar rotation period (∼ 25 days) is visible as
periodic increases in the field. The second panel shows the Parker angle
θ, which decreases as the comet approaches the Sun. The lowest values
are around 50◦, slightly higher than typical Earth values. The third
panel shows the density, which increases towards perihelion, as
expected. Typical values range between 2–8 cm−3, with increases due to
Corotating Interaction Regions (CIRs) or Interplanetary Coronal Mass
Ejections (ICMEs) reaching above that range. The velocity of the solar
wind is shown in the fourth panel. It does not change depending on the
comet’s heliocentric distance. The variation in velocity consists mostly
of periodical spikes that are caused by CIRs. The values range between
300 km/s to 800 km/s. It becomes clear that transients such as CIRs and
ICMEs change the solar wind parameters on short time scales.

CIRs are thought to be emanating from Coronal hole regions on the Sun.
They are regions where the fast plasma from the coronal hole interacts
with the slow plasma from the surrounding surface. Since the coronal
hole rotates with the Sun and thus the origin of the CIR rotates, they
appear to be spiralling outward into the solar system. The leading edge
of a CIR is often associated with a forward shock, while a reverse shock
forms the trailing edge (Pizzo 1985).

Sunspots are not only the source of flares, they also eject a large
amount of plasma into the solar system, which is called a coronal mass
ejection. These regions of high density, high temperature plasma
propagate with a velocity that is usually larger than the average solar
wind velocity. If this is higher than the magnetosonic speed in the
solar wind, a shock will form in front of the ICME. The structure of the
ICME is usually composed of a fast forward shock, compressed and heated
plasma from the slow solar wind, ejecta, and a magnetic cloud
(e.g. Tsurutani et al. 1988). When moving from upstream to downstream,
the shock is recognisable as a steep increase in magnetic field
strength, plasma density and temperature as well as a decrease in
velocity. The magnetic cloud is often characterised by very stable
magnetic fields.

Other, smaller scale phenomena of the solar wind, like e.g. magnetic
holes can also impact the plasma around the comet, albeit with smaller
scale reactions (Plaschke et al. 2018).

2.2 Cometary Plasma

Cometary ions primarily stem from the ionization (mainly
photo-ionization and electronimpact ionization) of neutral species,
although, to a lesser extent, they are also produced

through charge exchange between solar wind ions and cometary molecules
(see e.g. Gombosi 2015). This translates into the continuity equation:

where stands for the ion number density of the species j, its mean
velocity, is the sum of the sources for the species j, and the sum of
the chemical losses (ion-neutral reactions and dissociative electron-ion
recombination). Under steady-state conditions which are usually met, Eq.
(3) is reduced to a balance between production and loss processes:

Cometary ions primarily stem from the ionization of the neutral species,
mainly molecules which compose the coma, although they are also produced
through charge exchange between solar wind ions and cometary molecules
(Sect. 2.2.1). A given ion species j can also be produced through
ion-neutral chemistry (Sect. 2.2.3). The ions are lost through transport
as well as ion chemistry, including both ion-neutral reactions and
dissociative electron-ion recombination (Sects. 2.2.2 and 2.2.3). The
ion composition resulting from the balance between ion sources and ion
losses is discussed in Sect. 2.2.3, while the electron density profile
(or total ion density profile) is presented in Sect. 2.2.4.

2.2.1 Cometary Plasma Sources

Four main mechanisms lead to the formation of cometary ions, counted as
a source term in the continuity equation (Eq. (3)):

Photo-ionisation (PI): neutral molecules and atoms absorb sunlight.
Below a specific wavelength , Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) solar photons
are sufficiently energetic to strip one electron (or more) from the
neutral species X such that:

Note that in the general case a molecular species X may dissociate into
molecular and atomic fragments, resulting in the production of an ion
species different from its source neutral (i.e. either X = Y or with Y
made of a fraction of the atoms composing X). Wavelength thresholds
(energy thresholds) for cometary neutral species are typically in the
range 85–105 nm as shown in Table 1.

The major neutral species are not ionised by the strong EUV solar Lyman-
line (121.6 nm), but minor species can be (e.g., sodium). In addition,
there are weaker EUV lines which ionise to a lesser extent, such as HeII
(30.4 nm).

Newborn photoelectrons contribute to the warm ( ) electron population
(see also Sect. 2.3.4 and Broiles et al. 2016a). As the comet comes
closer to the Sun and the photoionisation rate scales with the inverse
square of heliocentric distance, photo-ionisation becomes increasingly
more efficient.

However, as the outgassing activity increases, the coma becomes more and
more opaque to EUV radiation which prevents photo-ionisation from being
effective close to the nucleus: only very energetic photons with short
wavelengths (< 40 nm) can penetrate. As EUV photons pass through the
coma, the neutral column density increases and the EUV flux decreases.
EUV solar photons are ‘lost’ and absorbed as a fraction of them have
already ionised molecules upstream. This fraction depends on the
outgassing rate but also on

Table 1 Ionisation wavelengths and energies (IE) for a few molecules and
atoms of cometary relevance. These thresholds can be found for example
in (Avakyan 1998) and at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST, Linstrom and Mallard 2021)

the wavelength. Bhardwaj (2003) and Beth et al. (2019) showed that
photo-absorption (PA) has to be considered for outgassing rates higher
than 1027–1028 s−1 for a pure-water coma (which corresponds to
conditions a few months around perihelion, see Heritier et al. 2018).

Photoelectron impact ionisation dominates over photo-ionisation in the
optically thick part of the coma for large outgassing rates (Bhardwaj
2003). For a planetary atmosphere under hydrostatic equilibrium, the
maximum photoelectron production rate occurs at the altitude where the
optical depth reaches 1. In contrast, at comets with an expanding coma
(not under hydrostatic equilibrium), the maximum production of
photoelectrons occurs at an optical depth τ = 2 (Beth et al. 2019) as
the neutral density, Eq. (1), falls off as 1/r2. For outgassing rates
below ∼ 1027 s−1, the cometocentric distance at which τ = 2 is below the
surface nucleus (at least on the dayside) and therefore photo-absorption
is negligible. Note that photo-absorption depends on the solar zenith
angle and that Rosetta was orbiting most of the time in the terminator
plane.

Electron-impact (EI). Like photons, energetic free electrons can impact
and strip one or more electrons from a molecule. This process takes
place for electrons with energies E>Eth such that:

Most cometary species have electron ionisation thresholds around 12–14
eV (Itikawa and Mason 2005). Electrons of such energies are less likely
to be produced by photo-ionisation, at least at large heliocentric
distances (> 2–3 au). Instead, they are likely solar wind electrons (∼
10 eV) diving towards the cometary nucleus, accelerated up to 50–60 eV
by the ambient ambipolar electric field (see Deca et al. 2017; Divin et
al. 2020). EI is a dominant process at large heliocentric distances,
whereas PI dominates near perihelion (Bodewits et al. 2016; Heritier et
al. 2018).

Solar wind charge-exchange (SWCX). At very large cometocentric
distances, the plasma is dominated by the solar wind plasma, mainly
composed of energetic protons, alpha particles, and electrons, with a
small addition of multiply-charged heavy ions. Through charge exchange
with the neutral coma, fast, light solar wind H+ and He2+ ions may
capture electrons from slow, heavy neutral species (Fuselier et
al. 1991; Bodewits et al. 2004; Simon Wedlund et al. 2019):

On average, the impacting ion species becomes neutralised. The net
result is the creation of slow heavy ions. A cumulative process in
nature, this mechanism is at play over tens of

thousands to millions of kilometres in the expanding neutral coma; it
dominates over photoand electron-impact ionisation at large
cometocentric distances where the mean free path of the solar wind
plasma decreases, i.e., the solar wind cannot pass through the coma
without colliding with the neutrals at least once (Bodewits et
al. 2016). This is of importance when the coma is dense and extended as
is the case when, for instance, the comet reaches perihelion. SWCX,
although not a producer of net ionisation in the cometary plasma
environment, is de facto partaking in the momentum transfer between fast
solar wind ions and the slow neutral coma, becoming the main process
modulating the formation and extent of the bow shock-like structure
upstream of the cometary nucleus for high outgassing activity (Simon
Wedlund et al. 2017). During the Rosetta mission, SWCX was not a
significant ion source process, except very episodically (Simon Wedlund
et al. 2019b, 2020).

Solar wind impact ionisation (SWI). Ionisation of the cometary neutrals
by direct impact of the fast solar wind ions contributes to the total
net production of ions in the coma. For example, for solar wind protons:

Combi et al. (2004) following Budzien et al. (1994) compared solar wind
ionisation frequencies for typical solar wind fluxes at 1 au of 3 × 108
cm−2 s−1. They emphasised that SWCX should dominate over SWI by at least
a factor 7 in efficiency in these nominal conditions. For 67P, Simon
Wedlund et al. (2019b) reported SWI frequencies about 1–7% (2% average)
of those of SWCX, except at times when faster solar wind streams were
recorded, possibly of CME/CIR origin, where SWI cross sections start to
become dominant over SWCX cross sections. The produced secondary
electrons, called proto-electrons, can be energetic enough to trigger
more ionisation in the neutral coma. However, because SWI is a minor
contributor to the total ionisation, ionisation by energetic
proto-electrons is expected to be small on average and may only play a
role when SWI itself becomes non-negligible (e.g. Simon Wedlund et
al. 2019, 2020, for a high-speed solar wind for which SWI cross sections
are favoured over SWCX).

Depending on the heliocentric distance, the cometocentric distance and
the solar wind conditions, the relative efficiency of these mechanisms
varies (Heritier et al. 2018; Simon Wedlund et al. 2019b, 2020), and,
unlike the ion-neutral chemistry discussed in Sect. 2.2.3, these
mechanisms are net sources of plasma. Figure 6 displays the 15-min
averaged ionisation frequency of all the separate ionisation channels
(PI, EI, SWCX and SWI) as calculated by Simon Wedlund et al. (2019b,
2020) and based on the latest EI data. The EI frequencies are derived
from the electron flux (outlined by Stephenson et al. 2021), with a 2-
to 15-min temporal resolution, and ionisation cross sections from
Itikawa and Mason (2005). Roughly speaking, when still outside of the
solar wind ion cavity (from October 2014–April 2015 and December 2015 to
end of mission, see Fig. 6), EI dominated most of the time, except
between January and April 2016 when photo-ionization was likely
dominating (although as shown by Heritier et al. 2018, only a few EI
frequencies could be derived then). In periods, most notably at the end
of the mission, SWCX frequencies may have become almost as large as EI
and PI frequencies.

It is worth mentioning that the solar activity varied during the Rosetta
escort phase. It started in the middle of the Solar cycle 24, a few
months after the number of sunspots peaked. From then on, the solar
activity monotonically decreased, causing an asymmetry in
photo-ionisation between inbound and outbound periods around perihelion
(Heritier et al. 2018).

65 Page 12 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 6 (Top) Ionisation frequencies of water from electron impact (EI,
blue), photo-ionisation (PI, red), Solar wind ionisation (SWI, yellow)
and solar wind charge exchange (SWCX, purple) at the Rosetta spacecraft
(see also Simon Wedlund et al. 2019b, 2020). The ionisation frequency of
PI and EI may not represent the ionisation rate throughout the coma,
especially near perihelion when electron degradation is significant and
the optical depth becomes large. SWCX and SWI are calculated only when
Rosetta was outside of the solar wind ion cavity as defined by Behar et
al. (2017). (Bottom) Heliocentric distance of 67P throughout the Rosetta
mission

2.2.2 Cometary Ion Losses

The main process causing a net local loss of plasma is electron-ion
dissociative recombination (DR). If the plasma number density is
sufficiently high and electrons are cold, ions and electrons merge back
together. However, the excess energy during this process induces a
fragmentation of the molecule, hence the term “dissociative”
(e.g. H2O+ + e− → HO + H). The associated loss term LR,j for ion j of
density nj , expressed in s−1 is given by:

(5) 

where ne is the electron number density (in m−3), αj (Te) is the DR
coefficient, expressed in m6 s−1, depending on the species j and on the
electron temperature Te . As Te decreases, αj (Te) increases. The DR
rate constant is thus simply kei = αj (Te)ne (in m3 s−1) (Heritier et
al. 2017a).

A competing process is the divergence of the flux. The transport term ∇
· (nj cj ) represents the rate at which ions j are coming and leaving a
specific location in space. In the case of dense planetary atmospheres
and ionospheres, this transport is mainly “vertical” and due to the
diffusion of the ions upward or downward, and their chaotic motion
through the neutrals or other ions of different masses (so-called eddy
and molecular diffusions). At comets, the plane-parallel approximation
(i.e., assuming that the curvature of the atmosphere can be neglected)
is not applicable and ions are born from neutrals with a non-negligible
speed (from ∼ 300 m·s−1 at the surface to ∼ 900 m·s−1 from a few tens of
kilometres because of the acceleration and adiabatic expansion of the
neutral gas, see Heritier et al. 2017b). In addition, a substantial
effect which is negligible at large Solar System bodies is the symmetry
of the outgassing flow (spherical, propagating from a point source).
Indeed, assuming spherical symmetry for the neutral coma and ionosphere
in the first few hundreds of kilometres

from the nucleus, the transport term becomes:

where stands for the purely radial ion velocity. The first term on the
right-hand side is equivalent to an ion flow in the plane-parallel
approximation (substituting r with z, the altitude). The second term is
due to the local curvature: as we move farther away, its effect
decreases, although our assumption (spherical symmetry) may not hold
anymore.

2.2.3 Ion Chemistry

Following the previous sections on ion sources and losses, the
steady-state continuity equation, Eq. (4), for an ion species j of
density reduces in a spherically symmetric coma to (e.g., see Heritier
et al. 2017a):

where:

- is the production of an ion j through ionisation (PI, EI, SWI) of, or
  charge exchange (SWCX) with, a parent neutral species p of density (in
  m-3). (in ) is the ionisation rate of process p and depends on the
  cometocentric distance r as discussed in Sect. 2.2.1,
- stands for the ion-neutral production reaction between the neutral
  species s and the ion species i, yielding the ion species j and
  neutral products. For instance, in the case of , produced through
  proton-transfer from (protonated H2O),

• represents the ion-neutral loss reaction between the neutral species
s’ and the ion species j, yielding the ion species i’ and neutral
products. For instance, H2O+ (protonated OH) is lost through
proton-transfer with H2O (protonated OH),

This term also includes charge exchange processes between ions and
neutrals except symmetric reactions such as . This does not affect the
plasma density, but the momentum equation and higher moments. For
instance, this reaction is more efficient than proton transfer at
energies above 1 eV (Lishawa et al. 1990) (see also Sect. 4.5).

• corresponds to the loss of the ion species j through electron-ion
dissociative recombination (DR, see Sect. 2.2.2).

The ion-neutral kinetic reaction rate constants and , expressed in m s-1
for bimolecular collisions, are a function of the gas (neutral)
temperature or a combination of ion and neutral temperatures (Banks and
Kockarts 1973; Rees 1989; Anicich 1993), which are

65 Page 14 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

difficult to constrain through observations (Biver et al. 2019; Myllys
et al. 2019; Wattieaux et al. 2020, and Sect. 3.1.3). The reaction
temperature is sometimes assumed constant for lack of better
constraints.

Composition. In theory, due to the complexity and diversity of the
neutral coma, the same degree of complexity is expected for the ion
environment. Historically, the first identified ion species at a comet
was CO+ as part of the bright blue “Comet-Tail emission” (Fowler 1910;
Larsson et al. 2012). However, only in-situ detections may help unravel
the greater extent of the ion composition. The first mission to perform
in-situ analysis of the ion composition was ESA’s Giotto mission to
comet 1P/Halley in 1985 (Reinhard 1986). Most spectrometers on board had
a mass resolution of about which allowed separation of molecules with a
different number of nucleons (e.g., 18 for and 19 for ) (Balsiger et
al. 1986). However, like neutrals, different ion species may have the
same number of nucleons (e.g., and ), which means that these ions are
indistinguishable. Aided by photochemical models, constraints were
provided for the ion composition and the relative contribution of ions
at a given u q-1 could be estimated (Altwegg et al. 1993; Rubin et
al. 2009).

As with many aspects of cometary physics, the Rosetta mission to comet
67P was the first to systematically survey with very high mass and/or
temporal resolutions the ion composition of the cometary coma. This was
achieved by a combination of three ion analysers and spectrometers on
board Rosetta, namely the Rosetta Plasma Consortium Ion Composition
Analyser (RPC-ICA, Nilsson et al. 2007), the RPC Ion and Electron Sensor
(RPC-IES, Burch et al. 2007), and the double focusing magnetic mass
spectrometer (ROSINA/DFMS) (Balsiger et al. 2007).

In practice, the plasma environment surrounding 67P was found to consist
in general of two distinct populations of ions, ions of cometary origin
and ions of solar-wind origin. Their presence and distribution depended
on the interplay between sources and losses:

Cometary ions (above ). Sources and losses of ions due to the
physicochemistry between EUV photons, energetic electrons, solar wind
ions and neutrals within the coma result in the presence of stable
cometary ions. Water-group ions (masses around ) were first detected by
RPC-ICA during the approach phase (Nilsson et al. 2015a). However,
RPC-ICA’s inherent mass resolution was insufficient to separate ions
with close mass-per-charge ratios (e.g., from ). Using ROSINA/DFMS in
high-resolution (HR) mode, several ion species were unambiguously
identified near perihelion, such as , , and (Fuselier et al. 2016; Beth
et al. 2016). However, this trio of species only formed the tip of the
iceberg. They were identified at the most favourable periods, when the
outgassing rate was the highest. Fuselier et al. (2015) showed that in
December 2014 (low activity), many other ions were also present although
their study relied on the low resolution (LR) mode of the instrument,
more sensitive than the HR mode at the expense of a lower mass
resolution (e.g., no separation of from ).

Recently, Beth et al. (2020) analysed and reviewed the full dataset
acquired by ROSINA-DFMS in ion mode with both resolutions between Oct
2014 and April 2016. Besides , , and , more than 20 ions were identified
in situ in 67P’s ionosphere (see Fig. 7 for an example at mass 16 u).
Minor cometary ion species that had been either previously predicted
(such as ) or observed remotely (such as ) were unambiguously identified
from 13 to 39 u q . However, the in-situ detection of their presence in
cometary ionospheres such as that of 1P/Halley previously relied on the
combination of both observations in LR and photo-chemicals models. In
contrast, ROSINA-DFMS made it possible to rely on HR observations alone
to exactly identify ions with a precision of < 0.01 u q (see Fig. 7).

Fig. 7 Overview of spectra at over the whole mission in high resolution
mode. Colours depend on the period during the escort phase. The detected
ion species are , , and . From Beth et al. (2020), reproduced with
permission ©ESO

Above , ROSINA-DFMS sensitivity falls drastically and no ions were
identified in HR. In LR ( ), peaks were observed at each integer
mass-to-charge ratio up to . In particular, the large peak at mass
contains ; however, this mass can be populated by other ions (e.g., ),
and therefore it is difficult, without the use of photo-chemical models,
to gauge its contribution throughout the escort phase. ROSINA/DFMS
operated either in neutral or in ion mode, preventing simultaneous
neutral and ion measurements.

Cometary ions can be separated approximately into three main families
(Beth et al. 2020). They can be produced by ionisation of a parent
molecule and lost through transport, lost through ion-neutral chemistry
with , or only produced by chemistry (such as protonated molecules, see
Fig. 8) and lost either through transport or chemistry.

Finally, the detection of a dication (doubly-charged ion), , was
reported for the first time at a comet (Beth et al. 2020). A large peak
was observed at 22 u q-1 in low resolution above the Southern Hemisphere
in the early phase of the mission, at large heliocentric distances,
where dominated the neutral composition. had long been observed in
laboratory experiments (Mathur et al. 1995) and predicted with kinetic
transport models in the -rich atmospheres of Mars and Venus (Witasse et
al. 2002; Gronoff et al. 2007; Lilensten et al. 2013).

Solar wind-derived ions (mainly at 1, 2, and 4 u q-1). Light solar wind
ions (H+, He2+, and He+ through SWCX) constitute the bulk and were
routinely detected by RPC-ICA throughout the mission (Nilsson et
al. 2015a,b; Simon Wedlund et al. 2016, 2019b) until the solar wind ion
cavity formed and solar wind ions were prevented from penetrating deeper
into the coma at the location of Rosetta (Behar et al. 2016b). Hydrogen
anions H- were reported in the RPC-IES data at the beginning of the
mission up to January 2015 (Burch et al. 2015a). Heavy multiply-charged
ions of solar wind origin (e.g., , , , , , , and their charge-exchanged
products) are also expected, although they have not been evidenced at
67P. Their presence can be inferred indirectly from the detection of
X-ray emissions, as in the case of comet C/1996 B2 (Hyakutake) whose
X-ray coma, first observed in 1996, heralded a new era in astrophysical
and cometary X-ray astronomy (e.g., Lisse et al. 1996; Cravens 1997;
Lisse et al. 2004; Bodewits et al. 2007,

65 Page 16 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 8 Schematic of the role of species with high proton affinity
molecules on the ion composition in the coma. Arrows represent
ion-neutral reactions, from the reactant to the product. Framed ions
have been detected by ROSINA/DFMS (Beth et al. 2020). Only H2O does not
result from protonation (of HO)

see also Sect. 2.5). For a longer description of solar wind plasma at
67P, as well as pick-up (heavy) cometary ions, see Sect. 2.3.1.

Cometary ion variations during the Rosetta mission. In addition to
listing in-situ cometary ions, Beth et al. (2020) also investigated
their variability. Some ions were detected at large heliocentric
distances but not near perihelion and, conversely (see Fig. 7 and
different colours for different periods of the Rosetta mission). This
was ascribed to the collisionality and reactivity of ions with water. On
the one hand, at large heliocentric distances, the detected ions are
those produced from direct ionisation of a parent molecule. Even if they
react with water, they will not be chemically lost at the location of
Rosetta through ion-neutral reactions, mainly with , , and . On the
other hand, near perihelion, mainly two kinds of ions were detected:
those not reacting with water (e.g., CH3+), and ‘protonated molecules’
(e.g., CH3OH2+, NH4+) yielded by ion-neutral reactions between water
ions (either H2O+ or H3O+) and cometary molecules with a high proton
affinity (e.g., CH3OH and NH3, see Fig. 8). Only a few neutral cometary
molecules may react with H2O+ or H3O+ by ‘stealing’ a proton from them
and become protonated molecules. Figure 8 shows how species with high
proton affinity affect the coma composition. Photochemical models
dedicated to 67P’s ionosphere and driven by DFMS observations include
for example that of Heritier et al. (2017a) in the mass range 28–37 u
around perihelion.

In contrast to previous fly-by missions (e.g., Curdt et al. 1988, for
Giotto), which mainly explored the outer coma and the inner coma to a
lesser extent, Rosetta was orbiting 67P in the inner coma. For instance,
Balsiger et al. (1986) showed that the plasma number density exhibit a
1/r trend close to the comet, whereas farther away, the density followed
a dependence. As far as is known, only the 1/r trend was observed and
reported at Rosetta (Edberg et al. 2015, for example). In addition, the
protonated molecules tend to be present in (and dominate) the ion
composition of the inner coma (Heritier et al. 2017a) where ion-neutral
reactions are favoured. As one moves away from the nucleus, the
protonated molecules fade away whereas is still replenished by
ionisation of the coma and

dominates the ion composition (see for example Beth et al. 2019, and
their simple model for and ).

A list of possible ion-neutral and dissociative electron-ion
recombination reactions for cometary ions is given in Appendix B of
Heritier et al. (2017a) for comet 67P, and in Häberli et al. (1995) and
Rubin et al. (2009) for 1P/Halley; the reader is also directed towards
dedicated databases, as described in Sect. 3.1.3.

2.2.4 Plasma Balance

In this section, we explore the consequences of the equation of
continuity, assuming both spherical symmetry, a negligible magnetic
field, and the absence of all electric fields. For a description of the
electric fields see Sect. 4.1, and for a plasma balance model taking the
ambipolar field into account see Sect. 2.3.2.

Because of the quasi-neutrality of a plasma, the number density of
electrons can be described by summing the number density of ions over
all ion species (total ion density, ). If we sum the continuity
equation, Eq. (7), over each ion species j, we get:

where:

- stands for the production of ions through ionisation (primarily, PI
  and EI) and through charge exchange (SWCX) summed over all parent

- neutral species p (see Sect. 2.2.1).

      is the weighted average ion velocity in terms of ion number

- corresponds to the net charge loss through electron-ion dissociative
  recombination (DR) (see Sect. 2.2.2).

Note that the ion-neutral chemical source and loss terms ( and , see Eq.
(7)) cancel out as we sum over all ion species as each (singly-charged)
ion created corresponds to one (singly-charged) ion lost.

At large heliocentric distances (> 2 AU). Under low outgassing
conditions, the chemical loss of cometary plasma through dissociative
recombination is negligible. For assessing the ion density at
cometocentric distances between 10 km and 50-80 km, the ion acceleration
is roughly constant and is reduced to an ion average velocity . Under
these conditions, Eq. (8) is reduced to (Galand et al. 2016):

where r represents cometocentric distance, n(r) is the density of the
neutrals, the total ionisation rate, and is the radius of the nucleus.

Equation (9) has been used to organise multi-instrument datasets from
Rosetta and to confirm the main cometary plasma sources and plasma
balance in the coma of comet 67P at large heliocentric distances (see
Sect. 3.2.1). By inspecting Eq. (9) as a function of r, one can notice
that the ion density is proportional to . Assuming a Haser model, Eq.
(1), where we neglect the depletion of neutral species through
photo-destruction and ionisation,

65 Page 18 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 9 Total ion density as a function of the cometocentric distance
computed with Eq. 10 for different neutral outgassing rates, outflow
bulk velocities (ion and neutral) and (total) ionization frequencies
(from Heritier 2018)

which is a reasonable assumption at low cometocentric distances (a few
1000 km) as the loss processes do not affect the neutral density
significantly (Heritier 2018).

The total ion number density (or electron density) can therefore be
further approximated to:

(10) 

where Q0 is the total outgassing rate (s−1) and un, the neutral radial
velocity, both being averaged over the different neutral species for
simplicity.

Assuming that the neutral and ion velocities are independent of r at
close cometocentric distances (r < 100 km), the total ion density
becomes solely proportional to (r −rc)/r2. It is zero at the nucleus
surface r = rc , and for large r, tends towards zero with a r−1 slope.
While being a much sparser population, the ion density decreases less
sharply than the neutral density (proportional to r−2) as ions are
produced constantly during the coma expansion, while major neutral
species only originate from the cometary nucleus. Furthermore, unlike
the ion production rates which increase down to the surface with
decreasing cometocentric distances (at these low outgassing rates at the
heliocentric distances considered here), the electron density exhibits a
peak. The (r − rc)/r2 dependency implies that the peak in total ion
density (or electron density) occurs for r = 2rc (Heritier et
al. 2017b).

This global maximum can be illustrated in Fig. 9, where we have plotted
the ion density as a function of r, using Eq. (10) and a set of
different outgassing rates, ion radial velocities (in this example also
equal to neutral radial velocities), and ionisation frequencies. We can
see that for every case, the peak of total ion density occurs at the
same r = 2rc = 4 km. Under real conditions however, the nucleus is not
spherical, and we therefore do not expect the ionospheric peak to be
always observed at a sharp r = 2rc . However, this simplified analysis
gives a satisfying theoretical result which solely depends on the
nucleus theoretical

radius and falls very close to what has been observed with in-situ
measurements in the case of comet 67P, during the final descent of the
Rosetta spacecraft towards the nucleus surface (Heritier et al. 2017b).
Indeed, we can observe an ionospheric density peak at r = 5 km (see Fig.
2 in Heritier et al. 2017b). Which is close to the theoretical value of
4 km. The trend as r increases could also be clearly identify in this
dataset, even though one must bear in mind that the trajectory of the
spacecraft was not radial, and the outgassing rate, ionisation
frequencies, and outflow velocities were varying along the trajectory
(Heritier et al. 2017b). We therefore do not expect an ion profile close
to what is illustrated in the theoretical Fig. 9.

Near perihelion. DR and PA should be considered. Indeed, on the one
hand, DR depends on the electron density which increases as a function
of photoionisation. On the other hand, PA depends on the neutral column
density which increases with decreasing heliocentric distances. These
two processes compete and decrease the ion number density. Under some
assumptions, the ion number density can be analytically solved for each
case either ionisation damped by PA or loss though DR but not together.
For instance, in the case of no PA, assuming the DR coefficient as
constant and that the ion and neutral velocities are equal, , although
that condition rarely holds at comet 67P due to the presence of electric
fields (see Sects. 2.3.2 and 4.1), the continuity equation, Eq. (7),
with DR, ionisation and transport only becomes:

(11) 

and the cumbersome solution is given by Beth et al. (2019):

(12) 

where and being the cometocentric distance and the cometary radius. The
last term of Eq. (12) is a correction for finite distances: 0 at the
surface and increases continuously towards 1 for increasing R such that,
for , the formula is Eq. (12) from Gombosi (2015). In addition, if or 1
(which is achieved at 1P/Halley while probably not at 67P), the ion
number density is that given by Cravens (1987) under photo-chemical
equilibrium, i.e. ions are produced and readily destroyed through DR
without the time to be radially transported.

This simple mathematical approach reveals that the ion number density
profile, whether transport or DR dominates, asymptotically follows 1/r.
As the comet gets closer to the Sun, drastically increases with the
combined increases of Q and . However, this shows that, depending on the
equilibrium at play in the inner coma, the dependence of the ion number
density with respect to the outgassing rate is different. For , while
for , . Moreover, as is increasing with the electron temperature,
e.g. the condition is fulfilled for very cold electrons even at
perihelion at least for 67P. For instance:

such that at 67P’s perihelion, only if eV. In fact, if one assumes the
electron temperature to be that of neutrals (i.e. roughly 100 K), one
finds that . Therefore, at 67P, the condition does not hold at anytime
and the applicability of the Cravens (1987) model at 67P remains
arguable.

65 Page 20 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 10 Upper row: illustration of three different regimes for the ion
dynamics in physical space (from Behar 2018). Lower row: 3-dimensional
evolution of two ion beams given by the generalised gyromotion in
velocity space (from Behar et al. 2018b, Fig. 1)

2.3 Plasma Processes

2.3.1 Kinetic Ion Effects

Before the Rosetta era, it was mostly the slow, new-born cometary ions,
or pick-up ions, that were considered to showcase kinetic behaviours not
captured by a fluid description, while such a fluid description was
deemed sufficient and less computationally expensive to describe the
solar wind flow within the cometary atmosphere. The foremost kinetic
phenomenon at comets is the gyration (Coates 2004): the cometary ions,
considered for simplicity as test-particles, are created in a reference
frame in which the acceleration resulting from the electric field in
combination with the magnetic field results in their movement along
cycloidal trajectories, with a characteristic length given by their
gyroradius:

where is the mass of the ion, and q its velocity, and charge. B is the
magnetic field magnitude. This gyroradius for active comets fairly close
to the Sun (such as the one visited by all previous cometary missions)
is typically much smaller than the interaction region between the solar
wind and the ionised cometary atmosphere. The cometary ions gyrate
several times within the interaction region, as illustrated in the fluid
regime panel of Fig. 10.

The general picture of the ion dynamics in a cometary environment was
widely broadened by Rosetta and the great coverage in parameter space
(mostly heliocentric distance and production rate) it allowed. In
particular, further away from the Sun, the ordering of these
characteristic lengths is reversed and we have to consider the situation
where the cometary ion gyroradius is significantly larger than the
small, dense ionised cometary atmosphere, as illustrated for this
kinetic regime in Fig. 10, upper row. The main difference from the fluid
regime to the kinetic regime in this figure is the breaking of the
symmetry with regard to the upstream flow direction. While in the fluid
description the cometary ions – though gyrating – are on average flowing
along the incident solar wind flow direction because of their small
gyroradius, they are now seen to escape the system sideways in the
kinetic description, along a direction indicated by the upstream
electric field, perpendicular to the incident flow. In order to balance
the total momentum of the system, the solar wind flow is illustrated as
being deflected towards the opposite direction.

One can give a more thorough, analytical description of these dynamics.
Under most conditions, the electric field is dominated by its motional
or convective term (see Sect. 2.3.2). Both ion populations, simplified
to cold beams of different velocities, are actually gyrating around
their common centre of mass in velocity space, as shown in the second
row of Fig. 10: both populations gyrate, and the ratio of their
gyroradii is directly linked to the ratio of their masses, as described
by Behar et al. (2018a,b). For low-to-medium outgassing activity and in
the comet frame, far enough from the dense inner coma, the cometary ions
are initially seen accelerated “upward” (along the convective electric
field), and the solar wind is seen deflected “downward” (against the
convective electric field). An additional, somewhat counter-intuitive
characteristic of the dynamics is the limited loss of kinetic energy by
the solar wind ions. This early solar wind deflection has been studied
extensively, both numerically and experimentally (Bagdonat and
Motschmann 2002; Nilsson et al. 2015a; Broiles et al. 2015; Behar et
al. 2016a,b), and one main result is reported in Fig. 11. From a limited
deflection far away from the Sun, solar wind ions were seen flowing at
angles up to 180 degrees from their upstream direction when closer to
the Sun, while little loss of kinetic energy was measured (their
upstream velocity can be estimated using solar wind measurement
propagated from Earth or Mars). Around perihelion, solar wind ions were
not observed anymore for a duration of about three months.

We have seen that in the region dominated by the solar wind, cometary
ions are expected to be overall accelerated in the direction opposite to
the solar wind deflection. On the other hand, in the inner coma where
the electric field is governed by the largely dominating cold new-born
ions, the ion dynamics are expected to be tied to the radially expanding
neutral molecules. In the observations, cometary ions of lowest energies
were indeed found to expand with a main radial component away from the
nucleus, whereas ions with higher energies are found to be precisely
ordered by the upstream electric field direction (Nicolaou et al. 2017;
Berciˇ c et al. ˇ 2018; Nilsson et al. 2020), as reported and sketched
in Fig. 11, two lower rows. The two cometary ion populations are
referred to as respectively the expanding and the pick-up populations.
Closer to the Sun, more complex flow patterns were observed around the
diamagnetic cavity (Masunaga et al. 2019), for which the simple kinetic
effects discussed above do not apply anymore, as the global regime
transitioned from kinetic-like to fluid-like (cf. Fig. 10).

The 3-dimensional generalised gyromotion displayed in the lower row of
Fig. 10 also presents “sideways”, asymmetrical dynamics, introduced when
considering a magnetic field not perfectly perpendicular to the upstream
flow direction, such as given by the classical Parker spiral. In the
comet frame, lower-right panel of Fig. 10, the cometary ions are seen
gyrating with only negative vy velocity components, while the solar wind
protons have a

65 Page 22 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 11 First and second rows: Observations of the deflection angle and
bulk speed of the solar wind protons (adapted from Behar 2018; Behar et
al. 2017, Fig. 1). Third row: Observations of bulk velocities of two
cometary ion populations. Last row, schematics of the acceleration of
cometary ions by an already deflected solar wind ion flow. Third and
last taken form Berciˇ c et al. ( ˇ 2018), reproduced with permission
©ESO

positive vy component, no matter the sense of the magnetic field. This
configuration is illustrated in a Sun-centred reference frame Fig. 3 of
Behar et al. (2018b), and ultimately results in an observable dawn-dusk
asymmetry, reported in the same publication.

Until now, the above-mentioned ion kinetic effects involved ion
populations described as simple cold beams. A more comprehensive view of
the dynamics can be given by the particle velocity distribution
functions (VDFs). Observations of solar wind proton VDFs are reported in
Fig. 2 of Behar et al. (2017). They find initially an anti-Sunward beam,
which then gets increasingly deflected (as previously discussed). Around
a deflection angle of 90 degrees, the beam transforms into a partial
ring distribution, confirming that the solar wind indeed gyrates within
the coma. At 2.1 AU, the proton VDF displays a partial ring which is not
centred on zero, in the comet-centred frame. Accordingly, with the
generalised gyromotion described previously, the central velocity is
that of the electron fluid, which, based on this observation, reaches a
few tens of kilometres per second, with negative vx and vz, and no vy .

The departure of cometary ion VDFs from a cold beam have been studied by
Nicolaou et al. (2017), reporting occasional observations of
energy-angle dispersion. While a first type of such a dispersion is
consistent with ions gyrating in the local magnetic field (partial ring
distribution), other VDFs show a second type of dispersion, which
indicates either a local electric field significantly smaller than the
upstream electric field, or the effect of a spatially heterogeneous
plasma environment.

2.3.2 Electron Sources and Kinetic Electron Effects

The electrons observed in the inner coma of 67P essentially derive from
two possible sources: 1) “cometary” electrons, produced in the
ionisation of neutral molecules of cometary origin, and 2) solar wind
electrons.

- 1)  The cometary electrons are predominantly coma photoelectrons and
      secondary electrons, released when neutral molecules in the coma
      are ionised by solar EUV radiation or by other electrons with
      energy above the ionisation energy of the molecular species
      (cf. Sect. 2.2.1). Since the electron is so much lighter than the
      parent molecule and its daughter ion, it gains virtually all of
      the excess energy of this reaction. Substantial photoelectron
      production occurs up to energies of about 50 eV, with a quite
      sharp drop thereafter (Vigren and Galand 2013). Thus, coma
      photoelectrons initially have energies of up to several tens of
      eV. The energetic free electrons that are responsible for
      secondary electron generation may themselves originate either in
      the solar wind or from ionisation in the coma (either by solar EUV
      or previous generations of energetic free electrons). The basic
      energetics of the reaction is the same irrespective of the nature
      of the ionising particle (photon or electron) and the term
      “cometary electrons” is typically taken to include electrons
      resulting from either of these processes in the coma.
- 2)  The electrons in the undisturbed solar wind are typically made up
      of a thermal core (electron energies 50 eV) and a suprathermal
      tail (∼ 70–1000 eV), the latter in turn consisting of two distinct
      sub-populations: the nearly isotropic solar wind halo electrons
      and a magnetic-field-aligned beam of electrons known as the
      strahl. Typical temperatures of the core and halo electrons are
      about 5–10 eV (core) and 60–80 eV (halo) respectively in the range
      1.4 AU to 3 AU (Pierrard et al. 2016).

There are a number of possible processes in the cometary plasma
environment that can affect the source electron populations and
contribute to sculpting the electron environment around the comet.

The ambipolar electric field is described in Sect. 2.3.3. Invoked by
e.g. Madanian et al. (2016) and Myllys et al. (2019) as a possible
acceleration mechanism for high energy electrons, as also seen in
simulations by e.g. Deca et al. (2019), Divin et al. (2020).

65 Page 24 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

The electron convective electric field can be interpreted as the sum of
the ion convective electric field e.g. that of the solar wind and the
Hall electric field. It is the primary mechanism that accelerates
electrons away from the nucleus when they are no longer under the
influence of the ambipolar electric field (Deca et al. 2019). This is
usually in the solar wind dominated region of the coma.

Adiabatic compression Conservation of the first adiabatic invariant
(magnetic moment) results in (perpendicular) electron heating of
electrons moving along magnetic field lines into regions of enhanced
magnetic field nearer to the nucleus (mentioned by e.g. Madanian et
al. 2016; Nemeth et al. 2016; Broiles et al. 2016b). The density is also
enhanced by this flow retardation, also leading to increased flux at all
energies.

Adiabatic expansion (Perpendicular) cooling of electrons (and decrease
of pitch angles) created in the region of enhanced magnetic field as
they move outward along magnetic field lines into regions of weaker
magnetic field. It is mainly proposed to occur in the decreasing
magnetic field just before diamagnetic cavity observations by Madanian
et al. (2020). The hypothesis of a double adiabatic evolution of either
cometary or solar wind electrons in the cometary induced magnetosphere
was tested in full kinetic modelling of solar wind-comet interactions
(Deca et al. 2019).

Collisional cooling of electrons on neutral molecules in the cometary
coma have predominantly been discussed for electrons of energies below
about 20 eV (Madanian et al. 2016; Engelhardt et al. 2018a), where
excitation of rotational and vibrational energy levels in the neutral
molecules (predominantly H2O) dominate. This is further discussed in
Sect. 2.3.5 below. At higher energies, other collisional processes
become more important, such as electronic excitation and electron impact
ionisation. Electron impact ionisation has been extensively discussed as
a source of plasma (cf. Sects. 2.2.1 and 3.2.1) and FUV emissions
(cf. Sects. 2.5 and 3.2.2). On the other hand, the possible impact of
such processes on the energetics of the hot electron population so far
lacks substantive discussion in the literature.

Wave-particle interactions e.g. acceleration of electrons by
lower-hybrid waves has been mentioned by many authors, particularly by
Goldstein et al. (2019) to explain very high energy (keV) electrons
(discussed further below). The efficiency of such a heating mechanism is
still being investigated (Lavorenti et al. 2021).

Electrostatic shock potentials Cross-shock potentials have been observed
to accelerate electrons to energies of 100s of eV, e.g. near the Earth’s
bow shock. This mechanism was discussed by Clark et al. (2015), but in
the end it was discarded due to absence of a bow shock at the time of
the observation. However, later when the infant bow shock was detected,
it was often found to be accompanied by an electron population of
enhanced energies (see Sect. 4.2).

From an observational point of view, further discussed below, three
distinct electron populations were observed by Rosetta: a cold
population (0.01–1 eV), a so-called warm electron population (4–50 eV),
and a hot population (above 50 eV). The cold (resp. hot) population is
believed to result from cooling (resp. heating) processes taking place
in the induced magnetosphere of comet 67P. A similar result was found by
Zwickl et al. (1986) from the brief ICE flyby of comet
21P/Giacobini-Zinner.

2.3.3 Electron Pressure and the Ambipolar Electric Field

Ionisation of the cometary gas by solar EUV radiation and electron
impact liberates electrons with energies typically in the tens of eV
range (see Fig. 12 in Vigren and Galand 2013), which corresponds to
thermal speeds on the order of 1,000 km/s. By contrast, the

Fig. 12 Left: Observed plasma density close to the nucleus during two
flybys in February 2015 (Edberg et al. 2015). Right: The effects of an
ambipolar electric field and of plasma compression on electron spectra
in a kinetic model (Madanian et al. 2016)

much heavier ions essentially retain the velocity they had as neutral
molecules (typically 1 km/s). As a result, the electron pressure is
relatively high and has a strong inward gradient. The electrons set up
an ambipolar electric field (Madanian et al. 2016; Deca et al. 2019)
(see also Sect. 4.1). For the Giotto flyby of comet 1P/Halley, Gan and
Cravens (1990) concluded that the ambipolar field could be neglected,
because of the efficient electron cooling taking place at the very
active comet. The activity of 67P varied between one and four orders of
magnitude below that of 1P/Halley at the Giotto encounter (Sect. 2.1.1).
In consequence, the ambipolar electric field and its effects on the
local environment has been much more strongly emphasised in the Rosetta
investigations.

Vigren et al. (2015a) assumed a model with 1/r profiles both for the ion
density and the electric field. Their results imply ion acceleration up
to the order of the ion acoustic speed. In other words, the typical ion
flow kinetic energy becomes equal to the electron thermal energy. This
is consistent with RPC observations (e.g. Berciˇ c et al. ˇ 2018;
Odelstad et al. 2018; Nilsson et al. 2020; Bergman et al. 2021). This
can be seen in the third row of Fig. 11, showing that the radially
expanding ion population (light blue arrows) has speeds of ∼ 10 km/s,
corresponding to energies of ∼ 10 eV. Note as well that the plasma
density given by this model underestimates the density expected if the
ions were constrained by collisions to flow with the neutral gas, as
assumed in some diamagnetic cavity models (cf. Sect. 4.6). The observed
plasma density in the near-nucleus region indeed shows an approximate
1/r behaviour, as observed by Edberg et al. (2015) and Myllys et
al. (2019) during close flybys (Fig. 12, left panel).

Madanian et al. (2016, 2017) used a two-stream electron model (Gan and
Cravens 1990) that includes cometary sources and solar wind electrons to
investigate the effects of the ambipolar field surrounding the cometary
nucleus. They concluded that only when assuming a potential drop of 100
V at the boundary of the model, mimicking the effect of the ambipolar
field, the model was able to reproduce the observed electron densities
(right plot in Fig. 12). The ambipolar electric field temporarily traps
cometary electrons and accelerates solar wind electrons, naturally
leading to the observed “warm” (tens of eV) and “hot” (hundreds of eV
and above) electron populations (Sect. 2.3.4). The ability of the
ambipolar field to retain electrons for a longer time in the inner coma
may also lead to increased cooling of electrons in non-collisionless
plasma regimes (Sect. 2.3.5).

Particle-in-cell simulations confirmed that the formation of an
ambipolar electric field near the nucleus results in solar wind
electrons with elevated energies (Deca et al. 2017). A follow-up study
by Deca et al. (2019) investigated the various terms of a generalised

65 Page 26 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 13 The electron environment close to the nucleus in a particle in
cell simulation. For description see text. From Sishtla et al. (2019)

Ohm’s law to identify the driving physics in the various regions of the
plasma environment of a weakly outgassing comet. The self-consistent
kinetic simulations showed the importance of the electron pressure
gradient and justified the 1/r-scaling assumed in the simplified model.
The polytropic index of the cometary electrons (contrary to solar wind
electrons) within 50 km from the nucleus was found to be close to 1,
supporting also the assumption of isothermal electrons within the dense,
inner coma region in the analytical ambipolar electric field models (see
discussion around Eq. (2.3.3)).

Sishtla et al. (2019) characterised the trajectories of trapped
electrons in the ambipolar potential well surrounding the nucleus and
defined a clear boundary in velocity space separating temporarily
trapped cometary electrons from passing solar wind electrons. Figure 13
illustrates the different classes of electron trajectories identified in
the simulation. The nucleus itself is not shown, but resides in the
centre of the region of increased ambipolar potential indicated by red
shading in the middle of the zoomed insert. The vertical lines are
magnetic field lines, colour-coded by the magnetic field strength. Mass
loading and partial flow stagnation leads to higher magnetic field
magnitudes near the nucleus. The spiralling lines show the motion of
three selected electron trajectories, with direction of motion indicated
by similarly coloured arrows. A solar wind electron (red spiral curve)
is seen to come in from the back of the figure, be deflected and
accelerated along the magnetic field by the ambipolar field toward the
region near the nucleus, where also its gyroradius decreases and
gyrofrequency increases as the magnetic field grows stronger. It crosses
the (magnetic) equatorial plane and leaves to the solar wind again on
its lower side. The green and blue spiral curves show cometary electrons
spending a long time semi-trapped by the combined effects of the
magnetic and the ambipolar electric fields near the nucleus, with a
bounce motion along B due to the outward directed electric field
combined with spiral and drift motion. There are no collisions in these
simulations, but they nevertheless show that temporary trapping can
occur in realistic geometries and can make the electrons stay for much
longer in the region of dense neutral gas around the nucleus, thus
increasing the cooling rate as discussed in Sect. 2.3.5. In terms of
Ohm’s law, it is caused by the asymmetry of the Hall term (Deca et
al. 2019).

Table 2 Summary of the three different electron populations by
temperature. The last column gives the most common generation mechanisms

Divin et al. (2020) concentrated on electron acceleration and pitch
angle distributions from cometary plasma kinetic modelling. They found
that for the Q = 1025 s−1 case studied, solar wind electrons were
accelerated along the magnetic field to energies of 50–70 eV, and found
electron spectra qualitatively similar to observations (see Sect.
2.3.4). As shown by Galand et al. (2020) and discussed in Sect. 2.5,
these accelerated electrons are of special interest as they can give
rise to auroral emissions. As discussed in Sect. 4.1, the electron
pressure is also related to the polarisation field investigated by
Nilsson et al. (2018) and simulated by Gunell et al. (2019). Simulation
codes and numerical models are further discussed in Sect. 3.3.

2.3.4 Warm and Hot Electrons

In general, we define three different electron populations at the comet:
cold, warm and hot. Generally, the warm population constitutes the bulk
of the density, with occasionally cold electrons dominating. Definitions
of the energy ranges are not always the same, therefore we present a
summary of the electron populations in Table 2.

As Rosetta came within a few tens of kilometres of the weakly active
comet nucleus in August 2014, the electrons observed by RPC-IES
transitioned from exhibiting typical solar wind-like bi-Maxwellian
behaviour to a distribution with energies of several tens up to hundreds
of eV (Clark et al. 2015). The observed electron signatures were highly
dynamical, with large variations in differential flux in both time and
energy. Such electrons remained a staple of the observations throughout
the entire comet escort phase of the Rosetta mission (Myllys et
al. 2019). The count rates below 100 eV steadily increased until
December 2014 and peaked between January and February of 2015 before
gradually decreasing again (Broiles et al. 2016a) as Rosetta’s distance
to the nucleus increased again and the comet became more active.

Broiles et al. (2016a) fitted two kappa distributions to IES
observations for two separate days far from and close to perihelion (30
October 2014 and 15 August 2015, see right panel of Fig. 14). The κ
values of the warm population were found rather high and ranging from
10–1000 (with variations in this range on time-scales shorter than the
128 s measurement cycle of IES), suggesting the population was near
thermal equilibrium.4 The κ values of the hot population were lower,
typically in the range 1–10, indicative of a population much further
from thermal equilibrium. Myllys et al. (2019) studied these warm and
hot electron populations over the full comet escort phase and
characterised the electron properties as a function of cometocentric
distance. Based on data from the two close flybys by Rosetta on Feb 4
and 28, 2015, a r−1.2 dependence with density was found for the warm
population, i.e., close to the ∼ r−1 dependence for the bulk density
found by Edberg et al. (2015) for

4The warm and hot electron populations are sometimes grouped together as
“suprathermal”, in contrast to the “thermal” cold electrons discussed in
Sect. 2.3.5. As the warm population appears to be close to Maxwellian,
we have here taken the view that the only clearly non-thermal electron
population is the hot part and therefore avoid using “suprathermal” when
referring to cometary electrons.

65 Page 28 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 14 Left: Observed IES electron spectra (daily averages) for
selected intervals. The grey spectrum (Aug 1, 2014) is typical for the
solar wind, the other represent various activity stages and
cometocentric distances (Madanian et al. 2016). Right: An example IES
electron spectrum with fit to two kappa distributions. The high kappa
value κw ≈ 18 of the warm population (Tw ≈ 7 eV) means it is close to
Maxwellian, while the lower κh ≈ 6 implies a significantly stronger high
energy tail in the hot (Tw ≈ 34 eV) population (Broiles et al. 2016b)

these same flybys (12). It suggests that the warm population consists
mostly of cometary electrons (i.e., electrons created during the
ionisation processes). The latter is in agreement with self-consistent
numerical modelling results (Deca et al. 2017).

For the hot population, Myllys et al. (2019) found a r−2.1 dependence
with density. Data from the dayside excursion (out to ∼ 1500 km between
2015-08-01 to 2015-10-20) corroborated the ∼ r−1 dependence of the warm
population out to about 900 km, after which a weaker dependence (∼
r−0.7) was observed. For the hot population on the other hand, the
density was quite constant or even increased somewhat as the spacecraft
altitude became higher; thus a different behaviour from the ∼ r−2
dependence observed months earlier during the close flybys. Neither
population’s temperature exhibited any dependence on cometocentric
distance.

Overall, when accounting for the radial cometocentric dependence of the
warm population, the densities of both populations increased with
decreasing heliocentric distance, as might be expected when both the
photo-ionisation frequency and neutral gas density increased. The
density of the warm population increased from about 30 to 100 cm−3
between 3.5 and 1.3 AU, whereas the density of the hot electrons
increased from about 0.1 to 3 cm−3. The temperature of the warm
population on average did not change with heliocentric distance, while
the hot population showed a modest increase by about 33%.

Various studies have addressed a possible link between the hot electron
population observed at Rosetta and the solar wind electrons. The hot
population density observed by RPC-IES was almost one order of magnitude
higher than the suprathermal halo density in the solar wind (Myllys et
al. 2019), although this was suggested by Broiles et al. (2016a) to be
the source of the hot population. However, the solar wind core electron
density was the same order of magnitude as that of the hot population,
and both decreased with increasing heliocentric distance, so it was
suggested that the hot population actually consisted of solar wind core
electrons that had been accelerated by the ambipolar electric field. PIC
simulations by Deca et al. (2017) appear to largely support this notion,
at least for the very low activity rates in their simulations. However,
Myllys et al. (2019) concluded acceleration in

an ambipolar electric field is insufficient for providing the hot
population energies that extend to ∼ 100 eV and beyond. Thus, this
high-energy tail of the distribution, which only has a minor
contribution to the total density of the population, can possibly be
explained as deriving from the suprathermal component of the solar wind
electron distribution. Madanian et al. (2020) suggest that the solar
wind electrons entering the cometary magnetosphere are mainly strahl
electrons. The differential fluxes they observed (for the single event
that they study) are higher than the typical flux of solar wind halo
electrons at 1 AU, but lower than the typical strahl component.

Goldstein et al. (2019) reported on intermittent measurements by IES of
up to ∼ 1 keV electrons on 19 January 2016, at about 2 AU from the Sun
and 80–100 km from the comet nucleus. Roughly moving anti-sunward, they
exhibited beam-like behaviour and were suggested to have been excited by
wave activity, specifically a two-stream instability. No further
statistical survey of the occurrence of such ∼ 1 keV electrons
throughout the mission was done.

2.3.5 Cold Electrons

Although the Giotto spacecraft did not carry any instrumentation to
directly measure the temperature of any low energy electron population
that might be present, it was theorised that the inner coma of comet
1P/Halley was sufficiently dense to efficiently cool electrons by
collisions with the molecules of the neutral gas (e.g. Feldman et
al. 1975; Ip 1985; Eberhardt and Krankowsky 1995). The initial data from
the much less active comet 67P showed no evidence of a cold electron
population when arriving at the comet.

Mandt et al. (2016) used neutral density data obtained by the
ROSINA-COPS instrument to calculate the distance of the electron exobase
(or collisionopause, see also Sect. 4.5), outside which electron cooling
was expected to be inefficient. The period under study was
April–September 2015, corresponding to heliocentric distances of 1.7 to
1.25 AU. The study concluded that Rosetta must have stayed well outside
the electron exobase during this time, consistent with the observations
of warm and hot electrons discussed in Sect. 2.3.4.

However, consideration of a slightly more elaborate cooling model,
integrating a loss function including rotational and vibrational
cooling, showed that cooling could be significant at least for electrons
originating close to the nucleus and hence passing through the densest
gas as seen in the lower two panels of Fig. 15 for electrons starting at
the nucleus surface at 1 and 10 eV, respectively (Engelhardt et
al. 2018a). It was suggested that further cooling could be brought about
by the mechanism noted by Madanian et al. (2016), i.e. that the
ambipolar electric field keeps them inside the dense region, thereby
increasing the time available for cooling (see also discussion of Fig.
13 in Sect. 2.3.3). Engelhardt et al. (2018a) also noted that another
effect of the ambipolar field simply is to slow down the electron as it
moves outward. This not only is a direct decrease of its kinetic energy
but also increases its collision cross section, further increasing
cooling.

Nevertheless, evidence of cold electrons in both the Langmuir probe
(LAP) and the mutual impedance probe (MIP) data was found throughout
this period and it was conjectured that the electron gas was a mix of
warm electrons created outside the exobase and cold electrons cooled in
the dense neutral gas further inside the coma (Eriksson et al. 2017).
Such cold electrons might be associated to the diamagnetic cavity (Sect.
4.6). The interpretation of the LAP probe current pulses as structures
of cold plasma akin to the regions of higher density in the hybrid
simulations by Koenders et al. (2015) was iterated in an extended study
of them through all the Rosetta mission (Engelhardt et al. 2018b). This
interpretation is consistent with the results by Edberg et al. (2019a),
who found that the cold electrons (as well

65 Page 30 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 15 Presence of cold electrons during the Rosetta mission according
to RPC-LAP is colour coded in the large panel, the red line indicates
the electron exobase distance. The first panel shows the latitude (blue)
and solar zenith angle (orange) of the spacecraft. The two bottom panels
show the final energies when reaching Rosetta position of two electrons
starting near the nucleus at initial energy 10 eV and 1 eV,
respectively, using a simple cooling model and the neutral gas density
observed by ROSINA-COPS. Grey overlays indicate times of excursions to
larger distance from the nucleus. From Engelhardt et al. (2018a),
reproduced with permission ©ESO

as the diamagnetic cavity) mainly are found on the side of the nucleus
where the solar wind convective electric field points toward the
nucleus.

Engelhardt et al. (2018a) combined MIP and LAP measurements to establish
an unambiguous signature of cold electrons in the LAP data. Their
mission summary plot is shown in Fig. 15, showing the first observations
already during the Rosetta 10 km orbits in October 2014, at around 3 AU
when the gas production rate was as low as 1026 s−1 (Hansen et
al. 2016). Days without observations of cold electrons (grey circles)
were rare inside 2.3 AU, and around perihelion cold electrons were
detected almost continuously.

The LAP and LAP-MIP observations of a mix of cold and warm electrons
were confirmed and extended through a fully independent method based on
MIP measurements alone (Gilet et al. 2017). For all intervals where LAP
had detected cold electrons and MIP were operated in a suitable mode,
MIP confirmed their presence (Gilet et al. 2020). Interestingly, the
opposite was shown not to be true: MIP also observed cold electron
detections without corresponding LAP detections. It is believed that
such cold electrons could not reach the LAP probe because of the
strongly negative spacecraft charging, which would prevent cold
electrons from reaching the LAP probes.

In a later study, Wattieaux et al. (2020) were able to provide densities
as well as temperatures of both populations for the time period
January–September 2016 using MIP mutual

Fig. 16 Warm (top) and cold (bottom) electron temperatures derived from
RPC-MIP spectra. The colour bar shows the normalised occurrence,
calculated for 6 h intervals, so each column can be seen as a colour
coded histogram. From Wattieaux et al. (2020), reproduced with
permission ©ESO

impedance spectra. They reported that the temperature of the warm
(referred to as “hot” in that study) population varied between about 3
and 20 eV, as expected for photoelectrons, while the cold population
mostly stayed in the range 0.05 to 0.3 eV (Fig. 16). Interestingly, a
significant correlation between the temperatures of these two population
was noted. Warm electrons most of the time made up between 10% and 30%
of the whole population, and the cold electron population was observed
to typically dominate the cometary plasma.

An intriguing result regarding the connection of electron cooling to
large scale structures was obtained by Henri et al. (2017), who could
show that the Rosetta observations of a diamagnetic cavity was very well
organised by the distance to the electron exobase (Sect. 4.6). In
addition, Odelstad et al. (2018) found that this region stands out also
regarding presence of cold electrons, as almost all LAP bias voltage
sweeps acquired during Rosetta diamagnetic cavity observations showed
signatures of cold electrons. For the small minority not doing so, it
was suggested the very negative spacecraft potential Vs blocked the
electrons from accessing the probes.

The evolution of the Rosetta spacecraft potential Vs has been reported
by Odelstad et al. (2015) and Odelstad et al. (2017), the latter
including data from the full mission and using data from RPC-ICA as well
as RPC-LAP for cross-validation of the results. The spacecraft potential
was mainly found to be negative, typically in the range −5 V to −10 V
but during long periods well below −10 V and sometimes going below the
LAP range of −30 V, as also seen in e.g. the ICA ion spectra published
by Stenberg Wieser et al. (2017). The negative Vs was initially
interpreted as due to high fluxes of electrons in the tens of eV range
and hence seen as evidence of the continuous presence of the warm
electron population. However,

Johansson et al. (2020) noted that the observed Vs correlates better
with the density of the cold electron population than with the warm,
which was unexpected as the cold electrons should not be able to reach
the strongly negative spacecraft and thus not be responsible for its
charging. The explanation was found in positively (up to +70 V) biased
conductive elements forming part of the solar cell strings on the solar
panels. Johansson et al. (2020) modelled how these efficiently collect
cold electrons and thereby push Vs down to large negative values. So
while the Vs statistics and measurements by Odelstad et al. (2015) and
Odelstad et al. (2017) are correct, the strong negative charging in fact
is more due to cold electrons than to the warm population originally
invoked. However, there is good evidence for the continuous presence of
the warm population in any case, as seen in data from LAP, MIP and IES
(e.g. Madanian et al. 2016; Broiles et al. 2016b; Eriksson et al. 2017;
Myllys et al. 2019; Gilet et al. 2020; Wattieaux et al. 2020). As yet,
no observation of only cold electrons has been reported at 67P.

2.3.6 Dust-Plasma Interaction

Comets have been suggested as suitable dust-plasma laboratories
(e.g. Mendis and Horányi 2013) and providers of nanodust to the solar
system (e.g. Mann 2017). Investigations of the cometary dust have been
one of the main themes in Rosetta data analysis, but this is a big
subject in its own and far outside the scope of this review. Here we
concentrate on the evidence of dust-plasma interactions yet identified,
with a particular eye to the influence of dust on the ionisation balance
in the coma of 67P. The take-home message is that despite some direct
evidence of charged nanograins near the nucleus and indications of an
extended upstream nanograin population it still remains unknown whether
or not Rosetta ever encountered an electron depleted plasma in the coma,
meaning a region where the positive ion number density markedly exceeds
the number density of free electrons, though published results have not
shown any evidence for this. Acceleration of charged dust particles by
the electric fields arising from the interaction of the solar wind and
comet plasmas have been invoked to explain some Rosetta dust
observations, but no feedback from the dust on the plasma has yet been
identified.

The simplest analytical cometary ionospheric models (described in Sect.
3.2.1) assume plasma to move radially outward with the neutral expansion
velocity and to not undergo any loss process. Such a model makes it
possible to predict the electron number density via the measured ambient
neutral number density, an assumption of the expansion velocity and an
estimation of the ionisation frequency (e.g. Galand et al. 2016; Vigren
et al. 2016). On the one hand, studies have shown that such a model, at
least in an average sense, works well at low to moderate activity and
close to the nucleus (e.g. Galand et al. 2016; Vigren et al. 2016;
Heritier et al. 2017b). On the other hand, studies have also shown that
near perihelion the model predicted electron densities often greatly
exceed the observed values, sometimes even by an order of magnitude
(e.g. Vigren et al. 2017; Henri et al. 2017; Heritier et al. 2018;
Vigren and Eriksson 2019; Beth et al. 2019; Hajra et al. 2020). Multiple
reasons for this discrepancy have been suggested and it is likely that
it comes down to some combination of attenuation of the ionising UV
radiation (Johansson et al. 2017), loss via dissociative recombination
(Vigren et al. 2015a; Heritier et al. 2018; Beth et al. 2019), outward
radial ion acceleration (Vigren and Eriksson 2017; Vigren et al. 2017;
Odelstad et al. 2018), non-radial plasma motion and grain charging. Not
much attention has been given to the possibility of a pronounced level
of electron depletion due to grain charging around active comets despite
the fact that the process plays a very central role in the ionisation
balance of the water dominated geysers of Enceladus as found in Cassini
measurements (Morooka et al. 2011, see also below).

Vigren et al. (2015b), using the grain-charging formalism of Draine and
Sutin (1987), showed that if the escaping gas carries aloft nanograins,
contributing to 1% of the nucleus mass loss, a significant level of
electron depletion would be possible up to cometocentric distances of
several 100 km during active phases. The study showed also that while
larger grains (tens to hundreds of nm) can acquire multiple negative
charges. These grains are unlikely to contribute significantly to the
overall level of electron depletion in the plasma. The reason for this
is the well-known fact that if a large grain fragments into smaller
units, the total charge that can be absorbed by the dust increases,
which can be understood as follows. The random thermal motion of
electrons will be efficiently repelled and the electrons therefore stop
charging a dust grain when it reaches a potential a few times −kBTe/e.
As capacitance scales with linear dimension, not with volume,
fragmentation of a dust grain into N equal parts increases the total
charge carried by the dust by a factor N2/3. As an example, consider a
cubic dust grain splitting into 8 cubes of half the linear size; the
total capacitance clearly increases by a factor of 8/2 = 4 = 82/3, and
so does the number of electrons attached to the grains and therefore
lost from the plasma (at least until the plasma becomes strongly
electron depleted).

The plasma effect due to dust is in general terms (e.g. Meyer-Vernet
2013) expected to be pronounced in “dusty plasma scenarios” where the
intergrain distance is smaller than the Debye length while smaller in
“dust in plasma scenarios” where the individual grains are isolated, as
being separated by distances exceeding the Debye length. For reasons
discussed below, it was not possible for Rosetta to infer the total
charge density bound to dust grains by independent measurements of both
the ion and electron densities in the way this could be done by Cassini
in the Enceladus plume (Morooka et al. 2011).

Nevertheless, indirect observations indicate that nanodust grains are
rare close to the nucleus but much more common far upstream, suggesting
that any significant dust effect on the charge balance should be more
pronounced at large cometocentric distance. Johansson et al. (2017)
compared the photoemission (emission of photoelectrons) from RPC-LAP
with extrapolated solar EUV (extreme ultraviolet) spectra from TIMED/SEE
(orbiting Earth) and MAVEN (orbiting Mars) and showed that the
proportionality factor decreased markedly with the cometary activity.
For instance, near perihelion the photoemission was ∼ 50% of the value
that would be predicted from extrapolating solar EUV spectra and using
the inverse square dependence on heliocentric distance established at
lower activity (both preand post perihelion). The authors noted that the
reduced photoemission cannot be attributed to attenuation of the EUV
intensity by absorption in the upstream gas and entertained instead the
possibility of an attenuation caused by nanometre sized dust particles.
The relative reduction in photoelectron emission showed no correlation
with the cometocentric distance and persisted even during the dayside
excursion (to about 1,000 km cometocentric distance). This suggested, to
Johansson et al. (2017), that the bulk nanograin population causing the
attenuation resided further upstream, likely originating from
fragmentation and/or erosion of larger grains.

Occasional direct RPC-IES observations of charged nanograins moving
antisunward (due to the solar radiation pressure) were reported by Burch
et al. (2015b). Gombosi et al. (2015) found the observations consistent
with grains of radius 30–80 nm accelerated antisunward mainly by the
radiation pressure. It can be noted that Szegö et al. (2014) calculated
that if the nanodust at 67P constituted the 6% of the nucleus total dust
emission inferred by Utterback and Kissel (1990) for 1P/Halley, the flux
of charged nanodust from the nucleus direction would be possible to
measure by RPC-IES. No such observations have yet been reported.
Instead, the nanodust events found by RPC-IES show antisunward directed
fluxes, with some deviation that could be interpreted as the effect of
electric fields. The latter is particularly clear in the simultaneous
detection of positive as well as negative nanograins by

65 Page 34 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 17 Observation of oppositely charged energetic nanograins by the
Rosetta Electron and Ion Sensor, RPC-IES. The energy flux of negative
(left, denoted “Electrons”) and positive (right, denoted “Ions”) dust
grains is colour coded in this energy-azimuth polar plot from which low
energy particles have been excluded. Detections of particles of both
charge signs over a wide energy range are indicated by the orange
ellipses, with their velocity directions compared to the solar direction
shown in the insert. This is one of the few (as yet) published pieces of
direct Rosetta evidence of dust-plasma interactions. Figure from LLera
et al. (2020)

LLera et al. (2020), where the deviation from antisunward motion is
opposite for oppositely charged grains (Fig. 17). Mainly antisunward
motion of submicrometer- to micrometer sized grains was found also by
the GIADA dust analyser (Della Corte et al. 2019).

To better constrain how large fraction of the electrons were bound to
dust grains at 67P, Vigren et al. (2021) considered equilibrium charging
of a dust population synthesized from Rosetta observations by Marschall
et al. (2020). The conclusion of this study was that because of the
dominance of large grains, the typical value of this fraction likely was
below 10% and possibly less than 1%. Photoelectron emission counteracts
the negative charge and may even (depending on the electron temperature)
charge grains predominantly positively, but a follow-up study showed
that positive grains also cannot carry a significant amount of the total
charge in the plasma Vigren et al. (2022).

These findings can be taken as a verification of the lack of emission
directly by the nucleus of particles in the sub-micrometre range, though
there may be complications due to the significant negative charging of
Rosetta itself (Odelstad et al. 2017; Johansson et al. 2020) which could
deflect negative grains away from the spacecraft (Fulle et al. 2015).
The presence of positively charged elements on the solar panels
(Johansson et al. 2020) can only locally alleviate this effect and does
not explain the general lack of observations. In any case, the
antisunward grain motion fits very well to the scenario with
fragmentation and/or erosion at a distance, as the radiation pressure
most efficiently accelerates grains at or below ∼ 100 nm size (Gombosi
et al. 2015). The electric force, which deflects particles off the
antisunward direction, is most efficient for even smaller grains, but
the simulations by Gunell et al. (2015) showed that also grains in the
10 nm range may follow electric field lines through the coma. The
intermittency of the RPC-IES nanodust could then be due to the
variations of the large scale electric field (see Sects. 4.1 and 2.3.2)
in the comet plasma environment (Gombosi et al. 2015).

Consistent interpretation of remote observations of dust at comets also
requires the presence of smaller grains (Combi 1994) at cometocentric
distances much larger than Rosetta’s. Such observations also show that
even further upstream, the density of such grains is depleted as they
are pushed back by the solar radiation pressure (e.g. Boehnhardt et
al. 2016).

Reconciling the in situ observations of the near-nucleus environment
with the remote observations of the more distant coma implies some sort
of fragmentation or erosion processes are active. What these may be is
outside the scope of this paper, but we may note that the large
aggregate dust grains found by Rosetta show low tensile strength
(Hornung et al. 2016) and thus are sensitive to fragmentation and
erosion mechanisms such as electrostatic repulsion (e.g. Hill and Mendis
1981) and the centrifugal force from increasing rotation speed of dust
grains due to direct solar radiation (Herranen 2020) or sublimation
driven effects (Steckloff and Jacobson 2016). Gas spectrometer
measurements have shown that some minor species, HF, HCl and HBr,
emanate from an extended distributed source. This indicated that these
species are evaporated from icy grains in the coma, showing the presence
of such dust grains. However, the contribution from these grains to the
water atmosphere was found to be insignificant (De Keyser et al. 2017).

The Cassini observations of an ion and electron density mismatch from
which the dust charge density was inferred was possible because the ion
density could be measured by the Langmuir probe of the RPWI instrument
(Gurnett et al. 2004). It should be repeated that while Cassini probed
Saturn, Enceladus and Titan at relative speeds of ∼ 30–35 km/s, ∼ 17
km/s and ∼ 6 km/s, respectively, Rosetta moved extremely slowly
(typically below 1 m/s) around the nucleus of 67P, with the result that
the equivalent instrument on Rosetta (Eriksson et al. 2007) could not
provide an independent ion density to sufficient accuracy (on both
spacecraft, the Langmuir probes as well as independent techniques based
on plasma resonances could establish the electron density). If Rosetta
had moved faster, enabling independent ion and electron density
measurements, would there have been any hint of a mismatch due to dust
charging? From the theoretical models applied to dust observations as
described above (Vigren et al. 2021, 2022), the likely answer is no.
This contrasts to the strong electron depletion inferred for the
Enceladus plume (Morooka et al. 2011; Hill et al. 2012) and Titan’s
ionosphere (Coates et al. 2007; Shebanits et al. 2013). The key to this
difference seems to be the very different properties of the dust from
the objects in question, relating to the their equally different dust
production processes, despite the apparently comet-like attributes of
Enceladus (Boice and Goldstein 2010). At Enceladus and Titan, the dust
particles are thought to be continuously produced and processed, from
liquid water expanding as jets through the nozzle of cracks in the ice
cover (Porco et al. 2006; Hsu et al. 2015) and by photochemical
processes in a complex atmosphere (Waite et al. 2007), respectively. In
both cases dust formation is ongoing, starting at small size. At the
comet the understanding is radically different: the nucleus was once
formed by large dust grains virtually untouched by the weak gravity
binding the body together, as indicated by the resemblance of the dust
aggregates at 67P to interplanetary dust particles (Langevin et
al. 2016; Bentley et al. 2016; Mannel et al. 2016). Now these large
grains are released as the volatile part of the solid material on the
surface sublimates due to solar heating. The grains apparently leave the
surface mainly under the influence of a gentle gas pressure gradient
and/or weak electrostatic forces, barely sufficient to lift the grains
which therefore do not immediately fragment to the tens of nm sized
parts they have been shown to be comprised of Bentley et al. (2016),
Mannel et al. (2016).

So how can we best summarise the Rosetta results on dust-plasma
interactions at comets, five years after end of mission? The main
finding is that no such effects have been obvious in the plasma data.
Rosetta investigations of dust and of plasma have provided a wealth of
new knowledge and understanding and changed the agenda of the scientists
investigating each field, but regarding their interaction almost nothing
have as yet been found from the data. This negative finding may to some
extent be due to the measurement conditions and also to the complexities
of the data set, where understanding of the plasma and dust observations

65 Page 36 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

on their own have taken years and is far from finished. Nevertheless, it
must be said that the picture of a near-nucleus dust environment
dominated by large grains is entirely consistent with the absence of
conspicuous dust-plasma interaction signatures. Large grains means a
small fraction of the plasma electrons adsorbed on the dust particles,
so that the dust effect on the plasma is small. Conversely, the big and
heavy dust grains are relatively insensitive to the electric fields the
plasma may set up.

However, much remains to explore in the Rosetta datasets. Even if the
picture we paint here, with limited dust-plasma interaction in the
innermost coma, would mainly hold true also in the coming years of
continued Rosetta data analysis, it might well be that the situation
could be different at particular events. For example, could there be
strong nanodust releases at outbursts from the nucleus, or some high
energy electron events causing so much charging of dust grains that
electrostatic fragmentation near the nucleus becomes very strong,
yielding lots of sub-micron grains and corresponding dust-plasma
interactions effects? There may still be surprises awaiting us even in
the existing datasets.

2.3.7 Waves

Waves are important in the cometary plasma, because they can transfer
energy and heat the particle populations (Krall and Trivelpiece 1973;
Tsurutani and Oya 1989; Treumann and Baumjohann 1997). Plasmas react to
contain the effects of perturbations through Debye shielding, but when
the wave modes of a plasma are excited, these waves can travel long
distances. Typically, waves are created by instabilities, they travel
through regions where they are weakly damped and deposit their energy in
regions of strong damping. It is through steepening of waves that shocks
are created, and waves provide dissipation in collisionless shocks (see
Sect. 4.2). Waves can be used as a remote sensing tool as the detection
of waves provides information of the remotely located place where they
were generated.

The spacecraft that flew by comets 1P/Halley, 21P/Giacobini-Zinner, and
26P/Grigg-Skjellerup probed a large part of the comet-solar wind
interaction regions of their respective targets, but due to the nature
of a flyby they could only provide a snapshot of the wave activity and
only at perihelion. Rosetta, on the other hand, accompanied comet 67P
through the inner solar system, but stayed relatively close to the
nucleus throughout the mission. Thus, there is no spacecraft that can
provide a complete survey of the wave environment of its target comet,
but we can still derive a picture based on the pieces of information
that we have from the different comets. Figure 18 illustrates where
waves have been observed at comets on large and small scales and for
different outgassing rates.

Pick-up induced waves. In a very large region around the nucleus (Fig.
18a), one to two orders of magnitude larger than the bow shock, both
electrostatic and electromagnetic waves were detected at comets
21P/Giacobini-Zinner and 1P/Halley (Scarf et al. 1986b; Yumoto et
al. 1986). These were the result of the interaction between the solar
wind and newly formed pickup ions (Wenzel et al. 1986; Scarf et
al. 1986a; Scarf 1989). Initially, these pickup ions are practically at
rest in the comet frame, due to the low neutral outgassing speed. In the
solar wind frame they will therefore, from the start, have velocity
components perpendicular and parallel to B. This results in a ring-beam
distribution, which is unstable and can lead to various wave modes, like
the ion cyclotron wave and the mirror mode (Gary 1991, 1992; Gary et
al. 1993). The first in-situ cometary encounters with 1P/Halley,
26P/Grigg-Skjellerup and 21P/Giacobini-Zinner made it possible to
investigate the presence of these waves near these medium-to-highly
active comets (Motschmann and Glassmeier 1993; Cao et al. 1995; Ip
2004). A full review of instabilities caused by ion pick-up can be found
in Wu and Davidson (1972), in Gary and Madland (1988), Gary (1991) and,
more recently, in Matteini et al. (2015) for cometary plasmas.

Fig. 18 The wave environment of comets on different scales. (a) Ion
pickup-related waves at distances 1–2 orders of magnitude larger than
the bow shock for a comet at high activity. The bow shock is shown in
orange in the centre of the panel, and the blue, fading into grey, cloud
represents the coma. On this scale, the nucleus is too small to be seen.
(b) Waves in the foreshock and at the bow shock for a high activity
comet. The orange region represents the bow shock. (c) Waves in the
inner coma, inside of the infant bow shock, at intermediate activity.
The infant bow shock is here illustrated through the corresponding
proton density structure in a hybrid simulation (see Sect. 4.2 and
Gunell et al. 2018). The red parts correspond to the highest density.
(d) The multitude of waves seen in and around the diamagnetic cavity:
ion acoustic waves near the boundary but on the inside; and on the
outside lower hybrid waves, steepened waves, and ion Bernstein waves. In
addition, the boundary itself may exhibit surface waves. (e) Singing
comet waves in the coma of a weak activity comet, where the wavelength
is on the same order of magnitude as typical length scales of the
ionised coma itself, the latter being represented by the green to grey
region. From Gunell (2020)

The Giotto magnetometer data (Neubauer et al. 1986) for the flyby of
comet 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup were investigated for the presence of ion
cyclotron waves (see e.g., Neubauer et al. 1993a; Glassmeier et
al. 1993; Glassmeier and Neubauer 1993; Coates et al. 1993; Volwerk et
al. 2013). Waves near the H2O+ cyclotron frequency were found to be weak
(∼ 1 nT) and irregular during the inbound pass and strong (∼ 10 nT)
“anharmonic” outbound (Glassmeier et al. 1997). The reason for this
asymmetry in the growth of the cyclotron waves remains unclear. However,
one possibility is that the wave properties could be influenced by
asymmetries in the bow shock at comet 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup (see Sect.
4.2). At the other comet visited by the Giotto spacecraft, 1P/Halley, no
heavy ion cyclotron waves were found (Tsurutani et al. 1987), however
waves with characteristics matching those of ion cyclotron waves were
observed at large distances from the nucleus (Yumoto et al. 1986). At
comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko ion cyclotron waves have not been found.
This might be due to the high plasma-β in the inner coma, which
suppresses the growth of these waves. The related mirror mode, however,
thrives in high-β plasmas, and these structures, and the possibly
related magnetic holes, have been found at comets.

Mirror modes. At comet 67P, evidence was found for two different kinds
of mirror modes on 5–6 June 2015. There were mirror mode trains with a
size of one to three waterion gyro radii, which are created by local
pick-up of freshly created H2O+, and another set of trains with a size
of 10 to 16 water-ion gyro radii, created by H2O+ pick-up in the solar
wind, and transported towards Rosetta (Volwerk et al. 2016).

65 Page 38 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Mirror modes are non-propagating structures, but as they are transported
by the plasma flow they are embedded in, they tend to diffuse. Hasegawa
and Tsurutani (2011) proposed a Bohm-like diffusion (Bohm et al. 1949)
for the mirror modes, in which the higher frequencies of the structures
diffuse faster than the low frequencies, and thereby the mirror modes
get larger as they are transported downstream. Schmid et al. (2014)
showed that this diffusion takes place both in the magnetosheaths of
Venus and of comet 1P/Halley.

Magnetic holes are thought to have evolved from mirror mode waves and
are identified as distinct depressions in the magnetic field embedded in
average plasma conditions (Winterhalter et al. 1995). They have been
identified near comet 67P (Plaschke et al. 2018), albeit at a rather low
rate of 23 holes in 2 months (April and May 2015), i.e. ∼ 0.4 per day.
Interestingly, magnetic holes were observed by Rosetta both in and out
of the solar wind ion cavity (Sect. 4.3). At first the holes showed the
characteristics of those in the solar wind, e.g., with an ion density
maximum at the centre of the hole. However, after the spacecraft entered
the solar wind ion cavity in April 2015, the characteristics of the
holes seemed to change, with observations of density maxima shifted with
respect to the magnetic decrease. Sometimes, the magnetic structure also
changed to a more complex form than a simple dip. This may indicate that
the holes were interacting with the cometary ions, as they became of
comparable size to the heavy pick-up ion gyro radii.

Waves upstream. At a high activity comet, outside the bow shock, there
is a foreshock region that exhibits phenomena not unlike those at the
bow shock of a planet, see Fig. 18b. In the foreshock, wave spectra
indicative of electron plasma oscillations, whistler mode waves, as well
as ion acoustic waves were detected at comets 21P/Giacobini-Zinner
(Fuselier et al. 1986) and 1P/Halley (Oya et al. 1986). Fuselier et
al. (1986) also detected enhanced levels of field-aligned electron heat
flux, which they could backtrace to the bow shock region of comet
21P/Giacobini-Zinner. In the bow shock region of comet
21P/Giacobini-Zinner, ion acoustic waves and electron plasma
oscillations were observed on the upstream side, and on the downstream
side lower hybrid waves and also whistler mode waves were seen (Scarf
1989).

The Rosetta spacecraft spent its time close to the nucleus of comet 67P,
and thus it was never in a place where it could detect the kind of
large-scale waves described above for comets 1P/Halley and
21P/Giacobini-Zinner. Instead there have been a few observations of ion
acoustic waves (e.g. Gunell et al. 2017b), lower hybrid waves
(e.g. Karlsson et al. 2017), “steepened” waves of yet undetermined
origin (Stenberg Wieser et al. 2017; Ostaszewski et al. 2021), and
singing comet waves (e.g. Richter et al. 2015).

Ion acoustic waves are electrostatic waves in a plasma on ion
timescales, that is to say, for frequencies below the ion plasma
frequency. The purely ion acoustic mode exists in unmagnetised plasmas
and for propagation directions parallel to the magnetic field in
magnetised plasmas. These waves are weakly damped only when the
electrons are much warmer than the ions, Te Ti. In this limit and for
long wavelengths, their phase speed is given by the ion acoustic speed
cs = √kBTe/mi (see for example Krall and Trivelpiece 1973). The plasma
in the inner coma of comet 67P fulfils these conditions. The majority of
the ions are water-group ions with a very low temperature, and the
electrons have temperatures in a range 5 eV kBTe 10 eV (Eriksson et
al. 2017). Also, at comet 67P the plasma can often be seen as
unmagnetised from a wave theory point of view even if the magnetic field
is not exactly zero, because the plasma frequency is much higher than
the cyclotron frequency and the wavelengths of ion acoustic waves are in
most cases much less than the gyroradii of ions and electrons.

Gunell et al. (2017b) reported ion acoustic waves like the ones shown in
Fig. 19a at approximately 500 Hz observed by RPC-LAP on the 20 January
2015 at a cometocentric

Fig. 19 Time series of waves observed by the Rosetta spacecraft during
its mission. (a) Ion acoustic waves 28 km from the centre of the comet,
which was at 2.5 AU heliocentric distance (power spectral densities were
published by Gunell et al. 2017b). (b) Low frequency ion acoustic waves
in the diamagnetic cavity at the same time as waves in the same
frequency range were seen outside the cavity (both reported by Madsen et
al. 2018). (c) Electric field observations of lower hybrid waves during
a part of the interval shown in panel (d) (interval selected from André
et al. 2017). (d) Steepened waves seen outside the diamagnetic cavity in
the magnetic field components as well as the magnitude of the magnetic
field. (e) Langmuir probe current showing waves interpreted as ion
Bernstein waves (Odelstad et al. 2020). (f) Singing comet waves shortly
after the spacecraft arrived at comet 67P (originally reported by
Richter et al. 2015)

distance of 28 km. The shape and structure of the ionised coma resemble
what is shown in Fig. 18c. At this point in the cometary environment’s
development heated proton populations were detectable. However, these
protons had only a negligible influence on the ion acoustic waves as
kinetic dispersion relation calculations showed (Gunell et al. 2017b).
Instead the observations were interpreted in terms of the interaction
between the cold cometary ions and a beamlike population of cometary
ions that had been accelerated by the convectional electric field. The
neutral gas density was seen to modulate the wave power in a way which
was consistent with the ion temperature being increased by the neutrals
scattering the beamlike ion population. Ion acoustic waves were also
observed during the close flyby on 28 March 2015, when Rosetta passed
the nucleus at 15 km cometocentric distance (Gunell et al. 2021). The
authors interpreted the observations in terms of a current-driven
instability, where the current is associated with the draping observed
by Koenders et al. (2016a).

Langmuir waves. Myllys et al. (2021) reported the observation of higher
frequency electrostatic waves, associated to the electron dynamics,
namely Langmuir waves, observed by RPC-MIP during the whole mission,
mostly in the 100 kHz to MHz regime, corresponding to the local plasma
frequency. The Langmuir wave activity monitored by RPC-MIP was

65 Page 40 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 20 Wave observations when Rosetta was in the diamagnetic cavity.
The power spectral density of the waves was measured using the Langmuir
probe instrument, RPC-LAP, on 3 August 2015. From (Gunell 2020)

significantly enhanced during SIR or CME interactions with the comet,
which could be the signature of suprathermal electron beam associated to
such energetic interplanetary events. It was also shown that the
Langmuir wave activity is strongly enhanced near perihelion.

Waves at the diamagnetic cavity. When comet 67P was at perihelion
further ion acoustic wave observations were made while Rosetta was in
the diamagnetic cavity. The wave spectrum peaked around 200 Hz and the
wave power decreased at higher frequencies, vanishing in the noise floor
around the ion plasma frequency at 1.5 kHz (Gunell et al. 2017a). An
example from 3 August 2015 is shown in Fig. 20.

The waves almost exclusively appeared inside the diamagnetic cavity.
When the spacecraft was outside the cavity the waves were much
diminished, if they could be detected at all. The diamagnetic cavity
itself is described in more detail in Sect. 4.6. The explanation by
Gunell et al. (2017a) was that since the spacecraft velocity is
negligible, the diamagnetic cavity encounters are caused by bulges on
the diamagnetic cavity boundary moving past the spacecraft as
illustrated in Fig. 20. A current must flow at the boundary to maintain
the difference in magnetic field between the inside and the outside of
the boundary. If this difference is not constant along the boundary some
of the current closes through the bulges, exciting current-driven ion
acoustic waves. Calculations, using kinetic theory, showed as an example
that a current density of 51 nA m−2 would lead to growing ion acoustic
waves, while keeping the magnetic flux density within the observational
constraint that B ≤ 1 nT, provided that the current-carrying layer is no
more than 37 km wide (Gunell et al. 2017a). Examining a much lower
frequency range of only a few Hz with the aid of the dual Langmuir probe
mode of RPC-LAP, Madsen et al. (2018) found ion acoustic waves (see Fig.
19b) in the cavity at the same frequency as that of lower hybrid waves
outside the cavity, where the electrons are magnetised. This suggests
the possibility of mode conversion at the boundary of the diamagnetic
cavity. Further observations, preferably supported by simulations, are
needed to identify the drivers of such a mode conversion and to charter
the paths of energy transfer in the boundary region.

A multitude of waves, not only those mentioned above, appear near the
diamagnetic cavity as illustrated in Fig. 18d. Both André et al. (2017)
and Karlsson et al. (2017) used the electric field mode of RPC-LAP to
observe lower hybrid waves, f 15 Hz, in the plasma outside the
diamagnetic cavity of comet 67P (see Fig. 19c). These lower hybrid waves
appear in bursts that coincide with sharp density gradients being
present in the plasma at the

spacecraft position. The gradients were found to be sufficient for the
lower hybrid drift instability to cause waves to grow in the frequency
range where the waves were observed. It was found that both the density,
the water ion energy, and the magnitude of the magnetic field increases
over approximately 20 s followed by a relaxation period of 1-5 min
(Stenberg Wieser et al. 2017). These minute-timescale oscillations are
known as steepened waves (see also the diamagnetic cavity Sect. 4.6). As
can be seen in Fig. 19d the magnetic field pattern of the steepened
waves is quite distinctive and was detected already during the first
encounter of the diamagnetic cavity (Goetz et al. 2016b). Both magnetic
field and ion signatures of steepened waves can be seen in Fig. 42 in
Sect. 4.6. The cause of the steepened waves is yet unknown. Another wave
was found at comet 67P by Odelstad et al. (2020), who detected
large-amplitude density oscillations at frequencies near 0.1 Hz in a
region outside the diamagnetic cavity boundary. The density oscillations
were, in some but not all of the observed cases, accompanied by magnetic
field oscillations phase shifted by . Odelstad et al. (2020) interpreted
the observations as Ion Bernstein waves (see Fig. 19e).

Singing Comet waves. Soon after Rosetta arrived at comet 67P, magnetic
field oscillations, as illustrated in Fig. 19f, were detected at
frequencies below 100 mHz with a peak around 40 mHz (Richter et
al. 2015). These waves were called singing comet waves, and using the
magnetometers aboard both the Rosetta orbiter and the Philae lander the
wavelength was estimated to be in an approximate range of 100-700 km
(Richter et al. 2016). This means that the wavelength is on the same
order of magnitude as typical length scales of the ionised coma itself
during the comet’s low activity phase as illustrated in Fig. 18e.
Breuillard et al. (2019) combined magnetic field measurements with
density measurements to show that the singing comet waves are
compressional, and Goetz et al. (2020b) found these waves extending to
distances of 800 km from the nucleus during Rosetta’s tailward excursion
in 2016. An analytic three-fluid model of a modified ion Weibel
instability was used to explain the generation of the singing comet
waves (Weibel 1959; Meier et al. 2016). There is partial agreement
between observations and model results (Goetz et al. 2020b). However, as
a uniform plasma was assumed in the model and the cometary plasma is not
uniform – the plasma density near the nucleus changes significantly in a
fraction of the wavelength – one cannot expect it to be a perfect
description of the plasma. Kinetic and space charge effects are also
beyond the simple model and may have an impact on the generation of
singing comet waves.

The solar wind-comet interaction, through the pick up of the newly
created ions leads to a large energy input into the plasma and the ion
scale. This energy partly goes into the creation of waves and
fluctuations. However, in part it also diffuses to smaller scales
through a turbulent cascade (see also Tsurutani et al. 2018).

In the case that the IMF is more aligned with the solar wind flow, such
that an anisotropy of is created, right-hand polarized waves can be
generated, observed, e.g., at comet 21P/Giacobini-Zinner (Tsurutani and
Smith 1986a,b). At three different highly active comets (mentioned
above) energy is pumped into the magnetic field at the H2O+
gyrofrequency, and the power cascades to smaller scales, i.e., higher
frequencies with a power law around , which would be according to
Kraichnan turbulence (Kraichnan 1965).

During the Rosetta tail excursion, and taking advantage of the long
dwelling time of the spacecraft, Volwerk et al. (2018) determined the
power spectral slope of the magnetic field by an analytic fit, , to the
power spectral density. The spectral index is shown in Fig. 21 as a
function of both cometocentric distance and of and separated into
periods with and without singing comet waves. There is a large spread in
, but the mean/median spectral slope is around over the full distance
travelled by Rosetta. However, when the spectral slope is plotted as a
function of there is a significant

65 Page 42 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 21 A–B: The spectral index α as a function of radial distance from
the comet for the singing dominated intervals and the no singing
intervals. C–D: The spectral index α as a function of log(P0), from the
power law fittings. In all panels the median (red), mean (green), and
standard deviation (blue) of the α-distributions are plotted. From
(Volwerk et al. 2018), reproduced with permission ©ESO

change in α from α ≈ −2.5 to α ≈ −1.5 for the non-singing events. This
flattening of the spectrum for stronger input P0 is expected, as more
power at large scales leads to more cascade to smaller scales. However,
the diffusion at the smallest scale will not increase with more input,
and thereby the total power over the frequency range will increase.

2.4 Response of Plasma Environment to Solar and Cometary Transients

There are two types of transients that modify the plasma around comet
67P: external ones such as flares, CIRs, and ICMEs (see Sect. 2.1.2) and
internal ones such as outbursts. The

Fig. 22 Example of the cometary plasma response to a CIR as measured by
the RPC instruments. a) Proton velocity in km/s, b) proton density in
cm−3, c) proton temperature in eV, d) magnetic field in nT, e) and f)
ion and electron energy spectra with energy in eV, g) electron density
in cm−3, h) latitude of the spacecraft in degrees, i) cometocentric
(blue) and heliocentric (red) distance of the spacecraftin km. From
Hajra et al. (2018a), Fig. 3

effects of these triggers can be quite different depending on the
heliocentric distance of the comet, the location of Rosetta within the
coma and the strength of the transient.

2.4.1 External Transients

Corotating Interaction Regions. The impact of CIRs on the cometary
plasma has been studied for two intervals: October 2014 to December 2014
and June 2016 to September 2016 (Edberg et al. 2016b; Hajra et
al. 2018a). These intervals have the advantage that the solar wind ions
still penetrated the coma and could be used to identify the
characteristic signatures of CIRs. For both intervals the gas production
rate was below 1026 s−1. A typical example is given in Fig. 22. Although
each CIR impact is different in the details, generally the plasma at the
comet during a CIR impact is characterised by increases in proton
density, velocity and temperature, as well as in magnetic field
strength, suprathermal (12–200 eV) electron flux and cometary plasma
density. This increase depends on the location of Rosetta and on the
characteristics of the CIR. For example Hajra et al. (2018a) found that
the increase in plasma density over the southern (summer) hemisphere is
much stronger than over the northern (winter) hemisphere (see also Sect.
3.2.1). However, when the increase is normalized to quiet-time values
these differences tend to vanish. This indicates that the plasma density
increase is heavily dependent on the neutral gas density at the
measurement location. Effects of the CIR usually last around one day,
and the signatures of a forward and reverse wave are clearly visible
even in the coma.

While first speculations attributed the large increase in plasma density
to either compression, additional ionisation or acceleration due to the
ion pick-up process, it was later found that an increase in the
suprathermal electron flux in turn leads to a significant increase in
the electron impact ionisation rate (Galand et al. 2016; Heritier et
al. 2018; Hajra et al. 2018a). Thus, the dominant process behind the
overall increase in plasma density is electron impact ionization which
produces the bulk of the plasma. The increase in proton density (the
minor contributor to overall density) and magnetic field strength are
mostly attributable to magnetic compression.

The sudden change of plasma properties around the comet can also move
boundaries or cause boundaries to form. One such example was shown in
Edberg et al. (2016b), where a region with very warm protons, increased
magnetic field turbulence and higher electron fluxes was briefly
observed. This boundary was later identified as the infant bow shock
(Gunell et al. 2018; Goetz et al. 2020a), see also Sect. 4.2.

While CIRs impact on a comet are now understood in the case of a low
outgassing activity that does not prohibit solar wind ions from
penetrating the inner coma (Edberg et al. 2016b; Hajra et al. 2018a),
the understanding of CIRs behavior within the so-called solar wind ion
cavity, observed for strong enough outgassing rates to form such a
cavity, is still lacking.

Interplanetary Coronal Mass Ejections. As with CIR impacts, the reaction
of the cometary plasma to ICMEs varies with each event. Five events have
been studied in detail at 67P so far, whose common denominators
regarding the plasma response are: (i) increase in magnetic field and
plasma density, (ii) increase in flux of energetic electrons, and (iii)
a Forbush decrease in the radiation environment. During the low activity
phase, in October 2014, an ICME was tracked throughout the solar system,
using data at multiple planets (including Mars and Saturn), combined
with solar observations and Rosetta data at 67P (Witasse et al. 2017).
The ICME signature showed the typical increases as well as an increase
in the measured proton speed. This event and the two described by
McKenna-Lawlor et al. (2016) are the only ones during which it was
possible to observe the solar wind in-situ during a CME, as the other
events impacted the comet when Rosetta was in the inner coma. For the
October 2014 event, the increase in plasma density occurred in two
separate increases, indicating that a shock and ejecta cloud formed the
impact ICME, which led to first a small increase in density (shock
impact) and then a larger increase (impact of ejecta). Using multiple
spacecraft it was possible to constrain the ICME speed to 550 km/s at
3.1 AU and a slowly decreasing velocity at higher heliocentric
distances.

Another ICME impact was detected in July 2015, very close to perihelion
when Rosetta was only 170 km from the nucleus. The compression of the
magnetic field produced field strengths of about 300 nT, the highest
value observed at the comet during the entire Rosetta mission (Goetz et
al. 2019). As with the earlier ICME event the increase in magnetic field
and density occurred in two steps. It was speculated that this was due
to the ICME structure. The density increase could also be due to the
magnetic field connecting the measurement location to different
locations in the near-coma environment. Both explanations fit the
observations and thus no conclusion could be drawn. The same goes for
the electron flux and magnetic field turbulence, which were observed to
increase for about half an hour before decreasing and then increasing
again. The authors also raised the possibility of a CIR as trigger for
the plasma changes, but the Forbush decrease visible in the radiation
monitor data indicated that an ICME must have played the more
significant role in this event.

A third event took place during the dayside excursion in October 2015,
when Rosetta was at a cometocentric distance of 800 km (much larger than
in the previous case) (Edberg et al. 2016a). Before the ICME arrived at
67P, Rosetta was located inside the solar wind ion cavity, but the
additional pressure from the high speed solar wind managed to push the
solar

Fig. 23 Measurements during the October 2015 ICME impact. From top to
bottom: a) magnetic field components in CSEQ and magnitude, b) solar
wind ion flux, c) electron flux, d) Langmuir probe current-voltage
sweep, e) spacecraft potential, f) plasma density. The start of the ICME
impact is marked as a vertical dashed line. From Edberg et al. (2016a),
Fig. 4

wind ions closer to the nucleus, so that they were observable at the
spacecraft location. The protons were still highly deflected and
decelerated. The other signatures were very similar to the previously
studied events. Large variations in the magnetic field were identified
as flux ropes, which could be the result of reconnection in the inner
coma. However, no flux rope signatures could be found in the July ICME
impact. This is surprising as the spacecraft was in the inner coma
during the July event, where according to Edberg et al. (2016a) the flux
ropes should be generated. Figure 23 illustrates the October 2015 ICME
impact. The observations of the plasma changes are very similar to the
July event. Fortunately, this event also proved to be visible with the
ALICE instrument, which showed that the electron impact ionisation
contribution was significant due to the higher flux of suprathermal
electrons (Noonan et al. 2018, see also Sect. 2.5).

Flares. Flares are short-lived increases in the Sun’s EUV and X-ray
emissions originating in sunspots and propagating through the entire
solar system at light speed. Because of the higher EUV intensity, flares
are expected to increase the amount of photoionisation in planetary and
cometary atmospheres. Edberg et al. (2019b) investigated a total of 1504
flares directed at 67P and their impact on the plasma environment at
67P. Against expectation only very few flares coincided with an increase
in the plasma density. This was attributed to two effects: (i) at low
gas production rate, photoionisation is a minor process in the creation
of the plasma, thus an increase in EUV does not contribute much to the
plasma source term; (ii) at high gas production rates, the plasma at 67P
is very dynamic with large density variations and, consequently, the
impact of a flare is drowned by the background plasma changes.

65 Page 46 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

2.4.2 Internal Transients

During the Rosetta mission, at least one cometary outburst was observed
to have a significant impact on the plasma at Rosetta’s location; it
took place on 19 February 2016 and was first described by Grün et
al. (2016). This outburst occurred close to the sub-spacecraft point on
the comet and thus the increase in brightness was followed by a
pronounced increase (factor 1.8) in the measured neutral gas density. As
is typical, the plasma density also increased with the neutral gas
density, but the increase in plasma density did not scale with the
increase in neutral density: it was significantly more pronounced
(factor 3.8). This over-increase was attributed to the additional effect
of electron impact ionisation, which is usually less important at large
heliocentric distance, but may become more significant due to the larger
neutral densities. In addition, it is suggested that the more efficient
ion-neutral coupling in the denser neutral gas reduced the ion speed and
thus the ionisation length scale (Hajra et al. 2017). During the
outburst, the suprathermal electron flux decreased, and the solar wind
ions vanished from the instruments’ field of view. The magnetic field
increased and changed directions as a result of local draping, and the
intensity of the singing comet waves (see Sect. 2.3.7) that are typical
for this stage of activity strongly decreased. Breuillard et al. (2019)
studied this interval further and found that the waves did not actually
vanish, but rather that their frequency was shifted to lower values.
They speculated that this was related to the additional ion-neutral drag
and the thus changing Doppler shift. For a discussion of the changing
emission profile during an outburst see Sect. 2.5.

2.5 Emissions Induced by the Plasma in the Cometary Environment

In addition to directly measuring and characterizing the plasma,
emissions can also be used to indirectly investigate the plasma.
Electron-neutral collisions in the coma can cause the excitation of
neutral species across many energy and wavelength scales. In the
far-ultraviolet, (FUV), 1000-2000 Å photons have energies eV, which are
typically associated with resonance transitions of cosmically abundant
atoms which are the products of the primary molecular species in the
coma. Only CO has electronic bands that fluoresce directly in the UV.

The identification of dissociative electron impact excitation in the
coma of 67P connected some periods of ultraviolet and visible
near-nucleus coma emissions to the properties of the local cometary
plasma environment. Charged-particle/neutral interactions had previously
been observed in cometary comae in the form of solar-wind charge
exchange (Lisse et al. 1996; Cravens 1997; Bodewits et al. 2012), but
the Rosetta mission identified electron-neutral interactions in the
analysis of UV spectra and optical images of 67P (Feldman et al. 2015;
Bodewits et al. 2016). Dissociative excitation is the process by which a
neutral molecule is split after collision with an energetic electron or
photon, producing excited atomic or molecular fragments. The brightest
emission lines observed at comet 67P in the FUV were associated with the
atomic transitions of the dissociation products of the major neutral
species in the coma (i.e. H, O and C, see Table 3). In addition to these
atomic multiplets, electronic bands of CO were observed towards the
long-wavelength end of the FUV range. In optical wavelengths,
dissociative electron impact produced excited molecules such as OH, OH+,
CO2+, and O I. The electron/neutral collision produces a spectrum that
is fundamentally different from typical atomic resonance scattering ( +
neutral) emissions in the FUV. This aids in the identification of the
parent molecule and thus composition of the inner coma.

In this section we discuss the physics of the emission mechanisms
directly observed by the remote sensing instruments on board Rosetta at
67P as a result of plasma-neutral

Table 3 Principal atomic and molecular FUV emission features seen in
Alice spectra (top) and known electron impact induced emission features
identified in OSIRIS narrowband filter images (bottom)

collisions, in particular dissociative electron impact excitation. Since
there are no X-ray observations of 67P to identify charge-exchange
emissions with solar wind ions we point the reader to relevant work
cited above and Sect. 2.2.1. We focus specifically on the plasmaneutral
interactions that were unambiguously observed at 67P by the Alice
far-ultraviolet (FUV) spectrograph and the OSIRIS camera.

Seen from Earth-orbiting observatories most cometary FUV spectral
features are the result of photon excitation, or resonance scattering of
the dissociation products of neutral molecules in the outflowing coma.
Resonance scattering of a solar photon produces spherically symmetric
emission that can be directly related to both the atomic column density
and the fluorescence efficiency, or g-factor, for the transition. This
is proportional to the transition probability multiplied by the solar
photon flux at the corresponding wavelength. The emission feature’s
brightness, in Rayleighs, can then be written as;

where is the column density in units of cm-2 and has units of photons
s-1 atom-1. Modelling the photodissociation of parent molecules (Sect.
2.1.1) allows the parent production rates to be derived. In addition,
prompt emission following photodissociation can also contribute to the
FUV emissions. While these photo-excited emissions depend only on the
solar flux at the comet and not the plasma environment, it is necessary
to understand them in order to identify the emissions that arise from
electron excitation.

2.5.1 Dissociative Electron Impact Emissions

Unlike resonance scattering, dissociative electron impact excitation, as
the name implies, dissociates and excites a neutral molecule. The energy
of the impacting electron must be enough to break apart the target
neutral and impart the remaining energy to raising the energy level of
an atomic electron. This reliance on electrons above a certain energy,
which is unique to each emission feature, closely relates the appearance
of dissociative electron impact emissions to the plasma environment
properties. However, the efficiency of this process changes with the
increasing energy of the impacting electron, with maximum efficiency for
UV transitions typically within 80-130 eV and declining thereafter.
Proper treatment of

65 Page 48 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

dissociative electron impact emissions therefore requires careful
calculation of the equivalent gX from the equation for resonance
scattering. To do so requires knowledge both of the emission cross
section, σ(E), and the flux of energetic electrons, J(E,s).

The brightness, BX, of an emission feature, X, driven by electron impact
is dependent on the particle flux of energetic electrons along the line
of sight s, J(E,s) [cm−2 s−1 eV−1 ], and the number density of the
neutral species, nl(s) [cm−3], along the observed line of sight. If the
excited states leading to emission are short-lived, the emission
brightness is given by

(15) 

where the spatial integral is over the column along the line of sight.
The contributions from each major neutral species in the coma are summed
to give the total brightness originating from dissociative excitation.
Because the energies of the impacting electrons are not quantized this
process is capable of producing atoms in classically forbidden states,
which quickly release a “forbidden” photon.

The emission brightness caused by electron impact is not dependent on
the total electron density, but rather the density of electrons which
exceed the emission threshold energy, ET h. Electrons with energies
below the threshold will not contribute as the emission cross section σ
X l (E) = 0 in this energy range.

If the energetic electron flux is constant along the line of sight, Eq.
(15) can be simplified to

where Nl is the column density of the neutral species, l, and νX l is
the emission frequency of the species in the given emission feature. In
this form νX l is equivalent to the g-factor described in Eq. (14). This
assumption can be made at large heliocentric distances where
electron-neutral collisions are uncommon and therefore there is no
significant energy degradation of electrons along the line of sight.
Chaufray et al. (2017) find that the measurements imply that there must
have been a constant suprathermal flux throughout the neutral column
when the outgassing rate was low (Q < 1026 s−1).

These emissions were most commonly captured in the Alice UV spectrograph
in near nucleus coma observations, easily identified by the presence of
the classically forbidden O I 1356 Å emission feature, typically
associated with aurora (cf. Meng and Huffman 1984). The dissociative
electron emissions were pervasive, and were present not only in periods
of relative quiet (Chaufray et al. 2017; Feldman et al. 2017; Galand et
al. 2020; Stephenson et al. 2021) but in rather unique situations like
outbursts (Feldman et al. 2016), co-rotating interaction region impacts
(Feldman et al. 2015; Stephenson et al. 2021), and coronal mass ejection
impacts (Noonan et al. 2018). Early in the Rosetta mission at large
heliocentric distances the OSIRIS instrument observed excess emission in
gas filter images that could not be accounted for with typical
photodissociation, and dissociative electron impact was invoked as a
plausible explanation (Bodewits et al. 2016).

The most powerful diagnostics from dissociative electron impact
emissions are the intensity ratios of atomic emissions that allow
determination of relative molecular abundances. These intensity ratios
are measured for different molecules in laboratory experiments (see
McConkey et al. 2008, for a review), providing a template for spectral
analysis. As an example, the atomic line ratios between Lyman-β, O I
1304, and O I 1356 are near to 7:2:1

for H2O (Makarov et al. 2004). For CO and CO2 the line ratios of atomic
carbon features at C I 1561 and C I 1657 Å are key for identifying the
dominant neutral source; a CO2-rich column will produce a C I 1657:1561
ratio of 2:1, while a CO-rich column will produce a C I 1657:1561 ratio
of 1:2 (Mumma et al. 1972; Ajello 1971a,b; Ajello et al. 2019). Examples
of these signatures are shown in Sect. 2.5.3.

The dissociative electron impact results from UV spectra taken at 67P
rely heavily on emission cross sections for the dominant neutrals in the
coma: H2O, CO2, CO, and O2. These cross sections, which detail emission
rate as a function of electron energy, are often taken with low energy
resolutions or with only a few energy settings. Analysing electron
impact spectra then requires assumptions about emission line ratio
behaviour at different electron energies to initiate models. The need
for improved dissociative electron impact emission cross sections to
further our understanding of the link between the plasma and neutral
environment of 67P is a clear area for future work (Sect. 3.1.3).

2.5.2 Ion-Electron Dissociative Recombination

In addition to excitation by energetic electrons, thermal electrons,
through dissociative recombination with molecular ions (Sect. 2.2.2),
can also leave the resultant atomic or molecular fragment in an excited
state leading to visible and FUV emissions that are dependent on the
electron temperature. Laboratory studies of electron recombination with
H2O+ (Sonnenfroh et al. 1993), H3O+ (Gougousi et al. 1997), and CO2+
provide signatures that allow the identification of these processes from
the observed spectra. In the case of CO2+, both , the upper state of the
Cameron band system (Skrzypkowski et al. 1998), and , the upper state of
the Fourth Positive band system (Gutcheck and Zipf 1973; Tsuji et
al. 1995), are populated. The latter is particularly relevant as the CO
Fourth Positive bands are strongly present in Alice spectra when CO2 is
abundant in the coma (Feldman et al. 2018), produced by energetic
electron impact on CO2 (Ajello et al. 2019), or solar fluorescence of CO
(Lupu et al. 2007). However, as Tsuji et al. (1995) demonstrate, from
energy considerations dissociative recombination of in its lowest
vibrational state, only v = 0 and 1 of the CO state will be populated,
giving rise to a Fourth Positive band spectrum sharply truncated below
1500 Å. This does not appear to be the case in any spectrum in the Alice
database (see Sect. 2.5.3), suggesting that this mechanism does not play
a major role in the inner coma. This absence in the Alice spectra is in
agreement with findings from the plasma instruments on board. The
ion-electron recombination timescale was much longer than the transport
timescale for the majority of the escort phase; for recombination is not
a major ion loss process (Beth et al. 2019). Further analysis, using RPC
ion and electron measurements, is warranted to support this conclusion.

2.5.3 Observations

The far-ultraviolet bandpass of the Alice spectrograph is 750–2050 Å
with a spectral resolution of Å for a filled slit. Alice observed atomic
and molecular emissions excited by dissociative electron impact in the
inner coma for a range of cometary activity levels and composition. The
excited species were identified by comparison of laboratory electron
impact emission cross-sections for H2O, CO, and CO2, (Makarov et
al. 2004; Mumma et al. 1972; Ajello 1971a,b; Ajello et al. 2019) to the
Alice spectra.

Alice spectra taken against the shadowed nucleus of the comet provide
stronger constraints on the electron and neutral densities along the
line-of-sight to the nucleus and also avoid contamination from the
extended coma and interplanetary background. Examples of

65 Page 50 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 24 NAVCAM context images (left) with the Alice slit superimposed
and near simultaneous spectral images (right) for 2014 November 29 (top)
and 2015 January 30 (bottom). The white horizontal lines outline the 4
rows used in the spectral extraction. In all of the images the Sun is
towards the top. From Feldman et al. (2018), ©AAS. Reproduced with
permission

this geometry are shown in the NAVCAM (navigation camera) images of Fig.
24, together with their corresponding two-dimensional FUV spectral
images. In addition, since Alice is an imaging spectrograph, the
variation in brightness along the slit also provides a measure of the
distribution of the energetic electrons producing the emission.

The first identification of dissociative electron impact emissions were
made from observations in September and October 2014 (Feldman et
al. 2015). The latter were limb observations from a distance of 10 km
giving a spatial resolution (2 pixels) of ∼ 100 m along the slit, which
was positioned roughly perpendicular to the limb. These observations
showed that the emissions decreased outward from the limb and were
concentrated in a region ∼ 1 km above the limb. A robust
multi-instrument analysis of the FUV emissions is described in Sect.
3.2.2 and by Galand et al. (2020) and Stephenson et al. (2021).

As described in Sect. 2.5.1 the most obvious spectral indicators of
dissociative electron impact emissions are relative strengths of atomic
emission features, more commonly referred to as line ratios.
Dissociative electron impact on different neutral molecules produces
unique atomic line ratios that can easily be distinguished from
resonance scattering. Far-ultraviolet spectra shown in Figs. 24 and 25
yield diagnostic information about the composition and local plasma
environment along the instrument’s line-of-sight. In the first example,
from 2014 November 29 at high northern latitude, the spectrum is due to
energetic electron (> 18 eV) dissociative excitation of H2O. The second
example, from 2015 January 30 at high southern latitude, is
characteristic of electron excitation of CO2. Both spectra

Fig. 25 Coma spectra corresponding to the spectral images in Fig. 24.
All of the spectra are summations over 4 rows in the narrow center of
the slit. The blue line is a synthetic spectrum of electron impact on .
The green line is the same for . Both are adjusted to compensate for
uncertainties in the energy distribution of both the cross section and
electron flux. The positions of the (2,0) and (1,0) CO Cameron bands are
also indicated. Note the scale change at 1750 Å by a factor of 2.5. From
Feldman et al. (2018), @AAS. Reproduced with permission

are taken from a distance of 30 km from the comet, observing towards the
shadowed nucleus to avoid contamination from emissions in the extended
coma, as seen in the associated NAVCAM images. Details are given in
Feldman et al. (2018).

Observations with the OSIRIS wide angle camera (WAC) filters of 67P
pre-perihelion provided additional spatial distribution information
about the prevalence of dissociative electron impact.

The WAC included multiple narrowband filters, including filters that
were centered on OH (A-X) and O I 6300 Å, which are mainly produced from
photodissociation of H2O. Dissociation of CO2, CO, and O2 is also
capable of producing oxygen in the metastable 1D state, which can
radiate to the ground state via emission of a 6300 Å photon unless
collisionally quenched at high inner coma densities (Festou and Feldman
1981; Cessateur et al. 2016).

From observations in early 2015, the column densities of H2O and CO2
derived from the narrowband filter images appeared to be consistently
larger than those reported by MIRO, VIRTIS, and ROSINA/COPS when
assuming photofluorescence of fragment species as the underlying process
(Bodewits et al. 2016). The reason for this discrepancy was twofold;
first, the emission was driven by electron impact rather than
photofluorescence; second, multiple fragment species were emitting
within the bandpass of some of the narrowband filters. The apparent
discrepancy decreased between March and June 2015, opposite the trend of
increasing production rates measured by other instruments, indicating
that the presumed emission mechanisms, fluorescence and
photodissociation, were now dominant over dissociative electron impact
which was presumed to be a major emission mechanism at larger
heliocentric distances. Evidence of a “plume” was also seen in these two
filters, an indication that dissociative electron impact emissions may
have been stronger within the a region on the sunward side of the
nucleus for this period.

This shift in mechanism dominances in early 2015 suggests a change in
the local electron population, resulting from electron cooling (Bodewits
et al. 2016) and/or a decrease of solar wind electrons (Galand et
al. 2020). Prior to the 2015 decrease, the CN emission likely contains
contributions from dissociative electron impact of HCN and contamination
from local CO2+ emission in the bandpass. After the 2015 decrease,
fluorescence of CN following photodissociation of HCN is expected to
dominate the CN filter images, but the exact

65 Page 52 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

contribution of the competing processes is unknown without further
supporting laboratory studies of HCN dissociative electron impact.

Based on the early Alice detection of dissociative electron impact
measurements by Feldman et al. (2015) the OSIRIS data is intriguing, but
the plethora of possible emission mechanisms, such as ion-electron
recombination (Sect. 2.5.2), capable of producing excess emission for
e.g. O I 6300 Å leave other possibilities for the surplus emission. As
highlighted in Bodewits et al. (2016), emission cross sections necessary
for uncovering the role of dissociative electron collisions in the coma
are lacking. While recent experiments for e.g. e− + H2O (Bodewits et
al. 2019) have made good progress on this front, there remain many
systems without supporting laboratory measurements (see Sect. 3.1.3 and
discussions therein).

3 Methods

3.1 Observations

3.1.1 Spacecraft-Based Observations

The Rosetta mission was the third cornerstone mission in the ESA Horizon
2000 programme. Originally targeting comet 46P/Wirtanen, a launcher
issue and subsequent launch delay meant that in 2003 comet
67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenkov was selected as the mission target. Following
launch in March 2004, Rosetta performed three Earth flybys and one Mars
flyby to obtain a trajectory suitable for comet rendezvous. During this
period, the mission also visited asteroid 2867 Steins in 2008 and 21
Lutetia in 2010. In August 2014 the spacecraft began the comet phase of
the mission. The Rosetta orbiter instruments were a mix of remote
sensing and in-situ experiments designed to characterise the cometary
atmosphere and nucleus, while the Philae lander was equipped to carry
out science at the surface itself. Most relevant to the investigation of
space plasma phenomena was the Rosetta Plasma Consortium (RPC). RPC
consisted of 5 instruments: the Ion composition Analyser (ICA, Nilsson
et al. 2007), Ion and Electron Senor (IES, Burch et al. 2007), the
Langmuir Probe (LAP, Eriksson et al. 2007), the Fluxgate Magnetometer
(MAG, Glassmeier et al. 2007), and the Mutual Impedance Probe (MIP,
Trotignon et al. 2007). RPC shared a common instrument control,
interface and power unit, the Plasma Interface Unit (PIU, Carr et
al. 2007). In addition, the Philae lander carried the ROsetta
MAgnetometer and Plasma monitor instrument (ROMAP, Auster et al. 2007).
The Rosetta Orbiter Spectrometer for Ion and Neutral Analysis (ROSINA,
Balsiger et al. 2007) also contributed significantly to the analysis of
the plasma environment around the comet, as well as Far Ultra Violet
(FUV) observations by the Alice instrument (Stern et al. 2007). All data
are available at ESA’s Planetary Science Archive (PSA, Rosetta section),
and also the NASA PDS small bodies node, including valuable accompanying
documentation, such as the RPC user guide,5 which describes instrument
capabilities and caveats in detail. Any potential user of the RPC data
is strongly encouraged to study these user guides to avoid data analysis
issues. The original prime scientific goals of the Rosetta mission (and
not just the plasma instruments) related to the comet phase are
described in detail in the ESA Rosetta science definition team study
report or so called ‘red book’ (ESA 1994).

5Direct link to download the RPC User Guide:
https://dms.cosmos.esa.int/COSMOS/doc\_fetch.php?id=1274141, direct link
to download the RPC Quick User Guide:
https://dms.cosmos.esa.int/COSMOS/doc\_fetch.php?id=3752622.

Fig. 26 Top: Cometocentric distance r (red) of Rosetta and heliocentric
distance R (blue) of the comet during the main phase of the Rosetta
mission. Major milestones are marked by arrows. Middle: Phase angle
between the spacecraft and the Sun in a cometocentric system. Bottom:
Longitude of the Sun and spacecraft in a cometocentric system. The gray
shaded boxes show northern summer, while the white background denotes
southern summer. The latitude was not included as it changes
periodically with the comet’s rotation rate (∼ 12 hours) and would not
be visible at this scale

The comet phase was broken into three distinct periods – pre-landing (up
to and including delivery of Philae to the comet surface and its
subsequent first science sequence in November 2014) and then the escort
phase from mid-November 2014 to December 2015, followed by the extension
period from January–September 2016. During the pre-landing phase,
trajectory, operations and observations were very much driven by
operational necessity to support the lander delivery, focusing on
characterising the cometary environment to facilitate this. Initially
during the escort phase, the trajectory design was based on science
observation requirements and the predicted capability of successfully
navigating that trajectory driven by the spacecraft drag in a particular
level of cometary activity. These were initially based on ground-based
estimates of cometary gas production, but then incorporated the Rosetta
measurements themselves. Gas activity was deemed low enough up to about
January 2015 to allow regular circular orbits around the nucleus, after
which box like segments were implemented, including near and far flybys
of the nucleus (see Fig. 26). This approach ensured that, in the case
navigation was problematic, the spacecraft would be in an escape
trajectory. This trajectory scheme had a long lead time and lacked
flexibility to change closer to implementation. An alternative scheme
was proposed, based on flying in the terminator plane, considered the
most robust location by flight dynamics, and limiting instrument
pointing requests (to facilitate a robust observation plan) and it was
agreed to move towards a hybrid of the long term trajectory, with more
flexible pointing, and the ‘terminator scheme’. During a close flyby of
the comet through zero phase angle in February 2015, the Star Trackers
(STR) onboard the spacecraft encountered issues reacquiring stars after
losing track and locking on false stars, related to the dust environment
near the comet nucleus. Although mitigation pro-

65 Page 54 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 27 Left: Dayside excursion, Right: Nightside excursion in a CSEQ
system. Color code is blue to yellow increasing in time

cedures were put in place, in March 2015, a subsequent close flyby at
almost double the altitude, resulted in more prolonged STR tracking and
related issues, which ultimately led to a safe mode onboard which moved
the spacecraft away from the comet. As the source of the problem was
dust and not gas pressure, following recovery of the spacecraft back to
full operations, the spacecraft was brought back to the comet gradually
to re-characterise its near-comet capabilities in a similar manner to
its initial approach in 2014. The trajectories implemented during this
period were so called pyramid orbits (hyperbolic trajectories on the day
side that could form triangles) and also terminator orbits, which were
considered the most operationally robust.

A robust trajectory design was implemented based on the simple
requirement from the science team of getting as close as possible (ACAP)
to the comet. The ACAP criteria meant that a majority of the time the
spacecraft remained in the terminator plane, as at lower phase angles,
STR behaviour led to higher altitudes being required. As the instrument
and operations teams became more familiar with the new process, further
requirements were added to optimise the trajectory for various goals,
including aiming for various latitudes, which includes region optimising
potential lander re-contact. Indeed, when the lander did communicate
with the orbiter during June–July 2015, the flexibility of the new
scheme allowed very rapid trajectory re-design to optimise potential
contacts, which was absolutely necessary to facilitate this activity.
Flying as close as possible was a huge challenge during the approach to
perihelion, as activity and hence the dust environment grew, causing
several retreats from the comet.

Following perihelion, with the exception of a ∼ 1500 km dayside
excursion (Fig. 27, left) at the end of September, the rest of 2015 saw
the spacecraft stepping closer to the comet and preparation for the
extension period. The trajectory plan for 2016 included targeting a
night side excursion ∼ 1000 km (Fig. 27, right), another zero phase
flyby and a number of specific orbits, including a 24 × 10 km elliptic
orbit, so called ‘quiet nadir period’ avoiding spacecraft slewing and
then finally the approach of Rosetta to the surface of 67P, during which
time overflights going down to just under 3 km altitude were enacted,
culminating on the soft impact of Rosetta (< 1 m/s) on the surface of
the comet in the Abydos site. It was during this final period that
Philae’s location was finally confirmed via a dedicated search campaign.

Fig. 28 Image of 67P/C-G obtained with the 2.5 m Isaac Newton Telescope
on La Palma on the morning of 19 January 2016. The picture was taken
through a red filter; the apparent colour has been added to help pick
out faint structures by eye. The tail extends 0.5 degrees from the
nucleus (the apparent size of the full moon) before reaching the edge of
the image, corresponding to a minimum length of 2.2 million km. Note
that the thick black lines are gaps between CCDs in the array (the
camera has 4 CCDs to cover half a degree). Credit: Alan
Fitzsimmons/Isaac Newton Telescope

3.1.2 Remote Sensing

Active comets usually display two primary types of tail: a dust tail,
comprising grains ultimately released from the nucleus, and an ion, or
plasma tail. The two tails are usually oriented at different angles: the
curved dust tail arises from individual dust grains being affected to
varying degrees by the effect of solar radiation pressure, whilst the
ion tail traces pickup ions as they are carried downtail by the solar
wind. Dust tails are visible as the constituent grains reflect sunlight,
whilst ion tails are observable remotely as their ions emit light due to
resonance fluorescent processes.

Despite the clearly unambiguous presence of pickup ions in the comet’s
vicinity, as discussed extensively in this work, and the coordinated
international observing campaign for Comet 67P utilising both ground-
and space-based observatories (Snodgrass et al. 2016, 2017), there exist
no unambiguous images of comet 67P’s ion tail during its 2014–2016
apparition. Unfortunately, it was therefore not possible to compare
changes to the comet’s tail with variations in the solar wind in 67P’s
vicinity, and other changes in the cometary environment measured in-situ
by Rosetta instruments.

There are several reasons for the lack of detection of the ion tail, the
primary one being the very low orbital inclination of 67P to the
ecliptic. This low inclination meant that all observations from Earth
were usually viewing both the comet’s dust and plasma tails, as well as
the dust trail distributed along its orbit, all superimposed on one
another (e.g. Fig. 28). There is no doubt that light emitted by ions in
the comet’s vicinity was detected, but as the comet’s gas production
rate was modest, the ion tail was likely overwhelmed by scattered and
reflected sunlight originating at the dust tail and trails.

65 Page 56 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

3.1.3 Laboratory Measurements and Cometary Analogues

The interpretation of in-situ and remote sensing observations of
cometary plasma environments can be very challenging. In addition to the
processes known from collisionless plasma physics collisional processes
and chemical reactions become relevant to varying degrees. Accurate
reaction efficiencies and their uncertainties are a crucial input of
numerical models that describe the physics of the cometary plasma
environment (Sect. 3.3). A complementary and informative method of
investigation is by laboratory measurements of the physico-chemical
processes and reactions at work. These laboratory studies aim at:

- 1.  Characterising reaction efficiencies and energy transfers: this is
      done by measuring elastic (i.e. scattering) and inelastic
      (e.g. ionisation, excitation, dissociation) energydependent
      ion-neutral cross sections σ(E) and reaction rate constants k for
      two (or more) species colliding with each other,
- 2.  Identifying molecular/atomic transitions for diagnosing local
      plasma conditions, including, for spectra analysis, threshold
      energies/electron energy dependencies,
- 3.  Reproducing plasma physical conditions similar to those
      encountered at a comet (i.e. a comet analogue), but in a more
      controlled environment.

Typical target species at a comet include major and minor volatile
constituents (e.g., H2O, CO2, CO, and O2, see Sect. 2.1.1), whereas
impactors range from solar photons and plasma of solar wind origin (e−,
H+, He2+), including fast neutrals (energetic neutral atoms or ENAs also
of solar wind origin, e.g., H and He atoms) produced from
charge-exchange reactions (Sect. 2.2.1), to slow-moving cometary ions
(partaking in the cometary chemistry per se). Secondary electrons
produced by the first ionisation (photoelectrons, protoelectrons, etc.)
can have sufficient energy to further ionise and excite the neutral
medium (see Sect. 2.5 and Bhardwaj 2003).

Several techniques of investigation in the laboratory exist depending on
the process studied; a description of the laboratory instrumentation is
outside the scope of this paper, but the interested reader is encouraged
to consult for example McDaniel et al. (1970), Bransden and McDowell
(1992), Brunger and Buckman (2002), Itikawa (2007) and, specific to
charge-transfer reactions and ENA production, the review of Lindsay and
Stebbings (2005). In brief, any experiment starts with the controlled
production of ions (for instance, with an electron cyclotron resonance
ion source) or electrons, which are then guided by means of
electromagnetic fields through a neutral gas jet, whose purity is kept
at an optimum level. It ends with the detection of collision fragments
and/or of light via several, usually complementary, techniques such as
collision-induced fluorescence, translational energy spectrometry, or
time-of-flight spectrometry, to name a few.

Laboratory measurements of ion-neutral collisions have been performed
since the 1950s (e.g., Barnett et al. 1964) and have historically
focused on reactions taking place in fusion plasmas and, more recently,
in radiation dosimetry applications to investigate the transport of very
fast charged particles through biological matter (Nikjoo et al. 2006).
Both of these applications have led to a measurement bias towards higher
impactor energies, typically above 1 keV/u (keV per unified atomic mass
unit). This is in contrast to the practical needs of the space physics
community, as solar wind energies are less than 1 keV/u on average (a
proton beam at 400 km s−1 has a kinetic energy of about 830 eV/u).
Theoretical quantum mechanics developments in ion-neutral and
electron-neutral collisions belong to a rich and dynamic field of
investigation, which is most difficult at the low energies relevant to
space physics. It is important to keep in mind that laboratory
measurements and theoretical calculations often work in synergy and
complement each other, for example when electron/ion

energy ranges cannot be probed in the laboratory for technical reasons
(see as an illustration the work of Anzai et al. 2012, on electron
collisions with various molecules).

Table 4 gives a non-exhaustive list of physico-chemical processes for
several targets of cometary relevance, as a resource for those looking
for fundamental atomic data related to cometary atmospheres, as well as
experimentalists searching for astrophysicallyrelevant pursuits. It must
be mentioned that though extensive work on this area has been done, one
must consider the uncertainties and scope of the laboratory data. For
example, the PHIDRATES database (Huebner and Mukherjee 2015) provides
reactions rates for two solar activities, and may not be applicable to
every environment. The reaction rate survey of Anicich (1993) covers
many bi- and tri-molecular collisions, but at a single temperature (300
K). In Table 4, the information related to dissociation and ionisation
is bundled under the broader context of electron impact, for simplicity.
In general, the data related to dissociative ionisation/emission by
electron impact of cometary neutrals is sparse. Whereas the data for
individual reactions may be applicable, it may be insufficient when
considering large ranges of electron impact energies simultaneously. For
example, many emission cross section studies suffer from one or more of
the following: poor resolution (spectral or in terms of Eelectron),
relative (and uncalibrated) cross sections and energy dependencies,
and/or large systematic uncertainties. Recent work has progressed on
this front (e.g., Bodewits et al. 2019, for e− + H2O), but many more
neutrals remain unstudied in sufficient detail (see also Sect. 2.5 on
cometary emissions). Any and all efforts related to dissociation
dynamics/emission, including the role of metastable states, should be
encouraged.

Other recent databases listing cross sections (sometimes even
differential ones) and reaction rates for various applications (not
necessarily astrophysical) are for example LXCat (Pitchford et al. 2017)
and QDB (Tennyson et al. 2017), both dedicated to low-temperature
plasmas; they function as an aggregator to many other more specialised
databases. A most recent addition to the field of collisional data is
the updated NIFS database (Murakami et al. 2020), which compiled and
evaluated hundreds of thousands of datasets involving many of the
collision processes in Table 4. Many useful references for
electron-neutral and ion-neutral reactions are also contained in the
appendices of the excellent book of Itikawa (2007), and in the critical
review by Avakyan (1998) for photo-, electron-impact, and
proton/hydrogen-impact ionisations, and for UV/visible emissions in an
aeronomic context.

Gaps in the current laboratory measurements must be addressed to better
interpret observations and constrain numerical models (see, e.g.,
Huestis et al. 2008; Simon Wedlund et al. 2019; Gronoff et al. 2020).
Several directions of investigation benefiting cometary studies can be
envisioned:

- 1.  Extend integral (and whenever possible, differential) cross
      section measurements towards the lower energy range (0.01 < E ≤ 1
      keV/u) with precise evaluation of uncertainties, especially for
      fast ion collisions (charge-transfer reactions, momentum transfer
      and ionisation), leading to recommended datasets for e.g. electron
      capture, stripping, and ionisation of important molecules (CO,
      CO2, . . . ),
- 2.  Expand the current range of neutral targets (including H, H2, He,
      C, N, O, CH4, OH, H2O, Ne, N2, CO, O2 and other minor cometary
      volatiles) and impactors (photons, electrons, H, H+, He, He+,
      He2+, and high ion states of C, O and Fe), and characterise them
      in ionisation and emission at relevant energies,
- 3.  For dissociative electron impact emissions, systematically measure
      cross sections for the main cometary neutrals (H2O, CO2, CO, O2)
      at high energy resolution below 1 keV impact energy (see Sect.
      2.5),

solar wind charge exchange (SWCX) and solar wind ionisation (SWI) of a
few selected cometary neutrals. The column entitled “Nature” emphasises
whether energy-dependent Table 4 Recommended measured reaction rates and
cross sections for cometary chemistry (CC), photoionisation (PI),
photodissociation (PD), electron impact ionisation (EI), cross sections
(and angular-dependent cross sections ) or reaction frequencies/rates k
(subscripts in for ion-neutral, en for electron-neutral and ei for
electron-ion recombination reactions) are given. In some cases, only the
most recent reviews are provided. Databases are in capital letters.
Emphasis has been placed on EI of H2O, CO2, CO and O2, which are listed
out here instead of the more recent synoptic review of Anzai et
al. (2012), because they usefully contain tabulated values for the cross
sections. DR stands for “Dissociative electron Recombination”, for which
a synoptic table of reaction rate constants can usefully be found in
Appendix B of Heritier et al. (2017a). Prominent emissions are also
given with wavelengths in nm

4.  Characterise ion-ion reactions energetics and energy-dependent cross
    sections (e.g., H2O+ fast + H2O+). Rosetta measurements show that
    pickup cometary ions accelerated by the solar wind convective
    electric field play a large role in the overall dynamics of the
    cometary plasma environment.

All of these points have strong implications on our current knowledge of
plasma-neutral reactions in the cometary coma and will help constrain
global and local numerical models more precisely.

Cometary plasma analogues. Is it possible to create a laboratory setup
which can serve as an analogue to the plasma at a comet? To build up a
laboratory experiment that mimics all processes at work at a comet at
the same time is not realistic, because the applicable scaling laws are
different for different processes. However, it may be possible to
conduct experiments on specific processes in the comet plasma
environment and by studying those scaleddown systems learn something
about comets. In recent years, advances in laser-plasma interaction
experiments have provided a means to this end. Potentially suitable
experiments have been performed on diamagnetic cavities and bow shocks
(see Sects. 4.6 and 4.2). In both cases these experiments have been
performed in a large plasma device (Gekelman et al. 1991), where
discharges create a background plasma with densities of 1012–1013 cm−3,
electron temperatures ∼ 10 eV, in a magnetic field of 0.03–0.08 T. A
laser pulse is shone on a target, which sends a carbon plasma, ne ≈
1015–1017 cm−3 initially, expanding into the surrounding magnetised
background plasma. Bonde et al. (2015, 2018) observed the formation of a
diamagnetic cavity as the laser produced plasma expanded into the
background. They presented measurements of the electric field both in
the cavity, at the boundary, and outside of it. The size of the
diamagnetic cavity was a few centimetres. The net charge of the cavity
was found to be positive, which is also true for comets where there is
an ambipolar field near the nucleus (see Sects. 4.1 and 4.6). The charge
density spatial distributions differ somewhat between the laboratory and
the comet, and the pulsed laser produced plasma expands at 130 km s−1,
whereas the continuously generated comet plasma expands at only a few km
s−1. In spite of such differences, the experiment may still be used to
understand the physics of the diamagnetic cavity boundary.

Niemann et al. (2014) conducted experiments, where the laser produced
plasma expanded at 500 km s−1. This led to the formation of a
subcritical shock (Alfvénic Mach number MA ≈ 2 which is below the
critical number of ∼ 2.7 Balogh and Treumann 2013). The authors also
presented hybrid simulations of the experiments, showing an asymmetry to
some extent resembling that of the infant bow shock (Sect. 4.2). Heuer
et al. (2018) and Heuer et al. (2020) performed experiments on the
ion/ion-beam instabilities behind shock formation, particularly of
quasi-parallel shocks. At another laser facility (Boehly et al. 1995),
shock experiments were carried out which allowed the electron and ion
distribution functions to be measured (Schaeffer et al. 2019), and these
experiments were modelled, using PIC simulations (Schaeffer et
al. 2020). The high expansion velocities in all these shock experiments
are similar to the relative velocity between a comet and the solar wind,
and the overall features resemble what is seen in comet–solar wind
interaction very well. Both in the case of shock experiments and for the
diamagnetic cavity experiments described above, it is likely that
comparing PIC simulations of the cometary and laboratory plasmas will
establish what the similarities and differences are on a detailed
micro-physical level. These shock experiments also produce diamagnetic
cavities, but considering the much higher expansion velocities used in
the shock experiments, the dedicated diamagnetic cavity setups are
likely better comet analogues.

65 Page 60 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 29 Multi-instrument approach applied to the analysis of the plasma
density. Coincident neutral gas, particle, and plasma observations are
linked though the solution of the continuity equation in order to assess
the plasma balance. The ion bulk velocity is derived from observations
from MIRO. The solar flux observed by TIMED-SEE at Earth is extrapolated
in phase and distance to comet 67P. From Heritier et al. (2018),
reproduced with permission ©ESO

3.2 Multi-instrument Analysis Using a Physics-Based Model

3.2.1 Multi-instrument Analysis of the Plasma Density

While it is very valuable to analyse the dataset from one single
instrument, the science return is enhanced by combining coincident
observations from different instruments through a physics-based model.
Here we apply such an approach to Rosetta neutral gas, particle, and
plasma multi-instrument measurements, which are linked through the
continuity equation applied to the plasma in the close environment of
comet 67P. The goal is to assess the cometary plasma balance (see Sect.
2.2.4), to confirm the major plasma sources, and to establish the major
plasma losses, at large heliocentric distances (2–4 AU) at comet 67P.

For low outgassing rates (local Q = 1025–1027 s−1), photo-ionisation and
electron-impact ionisation have been found to be major contributors to
the cometary plasma (Heritier et al. 2018, see Sect. 2.2.1). The
chemical loss timescales (associated with electron-ion dissociative
recombination) are negligible compared with transport timescales (see
Sect. 2.2.2) and steady-state conditions hold. As a result, the
continuity equation applied to the cometary plasma is reduced to a
balance between the sum of the ionisation production rates and the
divergence of the plasma flux (see Sect. 2.2.4). The solution to this
equation is given by Eq. (9). A multi-instrument approach is undertaken
by comparing the plasma density observed by RPC-LAP (Eriksson et
al. 2007) and RPC-MIP (Trotignon et al. 2007) and the modelled plasma
density along the trajectory of Rosetta. The modelled plasma number
density is derived from coincident observations of energetic electron
spectral fluxes by RPC-IES (Burch et al. 2007), neutral number density
by ROSINA-COPS, and neutral composition by ROSINA/DFMS (Balsiger et
al. 2007; Galand et al. 2016; Heritier et al. 2018). The approach is
illustrated in Fig. 29. The cometocentric distance r corresponds here to
the one of Rosetta. A detailed description of the approach and a
justification of the assumptions are presented in Galand et al. (2016).

At these low outgassing rates and close to the comet, ions are assumed
to travel radially at the same bulk velocity (u in Fig. 29) as the
neutrals (corresponding to the neutral terminal expansion velocity). The
values are derived from observations from MIRO (Gulkis et al. 2007) and
typically range between 400 and 750 m/s (Gulkis et al. 2015; Biver et
al. 2019) at large heliocentric distances (2–4 au).

The coma at the level of activity considered is optically thin, hence
the photo-ionisation frequency, , is independent of the cometocentric
distance (Heritier et al. 2018; Heritier 2018). This frequency is
derived from the daily value of the spectral solar flux obtained from
measurements by the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and
Dynamics (TIMED) - Solar EUV Experiment (see Woods et al. 2005). As the
Sun, Earth, and comet 67P are not usually aligned, a phase shift is
applied in order to identify the most representative period as seen from
Earth to infer the solar spectral flux at comet 67P. The longitudinal
phase shifted spectral flux at 1 AU is adjusted to the heliocentric
distance, , of comet 67P. The photo-ionisation frequency, weighted with
respect to the local neutral composition measured by ROSINA-DFMS, is
given by:

where is the volume mixing ratio of the species p derived from
ROSINA-DFMS and is the photo-ionisation cross section of the neutral
species p through absorption of solar photons of wavelength . is the
wavelength threshold around 90–100 nm (see Sect. 2.2.1). The minimum
wavelength, , considered is typically around 0.1–1 nm.

The coma is anticipated not to be dense enough to have the energetic,
suprathermal electrons undergo significant energy loss (Heritier 2018).
The electron-impact ionisation frequency, is hence assumed to be
constant within the radial column between Rosetta and the cometary
nucleus. Weighted with respect to the local neutral composition measured
by ROSINA-DFMS, it is given by:

(18) 

where is the electron-impact ionisation cross section of the neutral
species p through collisions by electrons of energy E. The energy
threshold is around 12–14 eV (see Sect. 2.2.1) and is typically around
200 eV. The relevant ionisation cross-sections are largest at electron
energies of around 100 eV. is the suprathermal electron spectral flux
measured by RPC-IES. It is derived from in-situ measurements by RPC/IES
(Burch et al. 2007) (see Sect. 3.1). The measured flux is corrected for
the spacecraft potential , measured by RPC/LAP (Eriksson et al. 2007),
using Liouville’s theorem (Galand et al. 2016).

(19) 

The multi-instrument analysis of the plasma density is robust over a
large variety of conditions (e.g., season, hemisphere, pre- and
post-perihelion, quiet and disturbed solar activity) encountered by
Rosetta at large heliocentric distances:

• During pre-perihelion, quiet solar conditions:

Over the northern, summer hemisphere, there is a very good agreement
between the observed and modelled plasma densities (see 2014 October 17
in Fig. 30), even when the electron-impact ionisation is neglected
(Vigren et al. 2016). The pre-perihelion phase started shortly after
solar maximum (Heritier et al. 2018): photo-ionisation is the dominant
source of ionisation, while electron-impact ionisation has a marginal
contribution

65 Page 62 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 30 Top: ROSINA-COPS total neutral number density (solid line)
measured at Rosetta and the subspacecraft latitude (dashed line) as a
function of time. Bottom: Ionospheric density as a function of time. The
period shown is 2014 October 17–18. The blue (red) curves correspond to
the calculated plasma density assuming photoionization alone
(photoionization and electron-impact ionization). The vertical spread of
these curves corresponds to the range of ion outflow velocity
considered, spreading from 400 m/s (top boundary) to 700 m/s (bottom
boundary). The RPC-MIP electron density is shown with large, violet
dots. The RPC-LAP electron density is shown with small green dots,
assuming an electron temperature of 7.5 eV (light green). Due to a
different operation mode, there is no RPC-LAP electron density available
between 07:00 and 08:30 UT on 2014 October 18. The subsolar latitude was
40◦ and Rosetta was in the solar terminator plane. From Galand et
al. (2016), Fig. 15

over the most outgassing hemisphere (Galand et al. 2016). A dependence
in r−1 of the plasma density was observed (Galand et al. 2016), as
predicted by the model (see Fig. 29).

In contrast, the plasma number density over the southern, winter
hemisphere during pre-perihelion is dominantly produced through
electron-impact ionisation (Galand et al. 2016; Heritier 2018). If only
the photo-ionisation contribution is taken into account, the modelled
plasma density largely underestimates the observed plasma density (see
2014 October 18 in Fig. 30). The observed electron flux is more intense
over the winter hemisphere than over the summer hemisphere. This
intensification over-compensates the weaker neutral density over the
winter hemisphere; as a result, the plasma density was found to be
higher over the winter hemisphere than over the summer hemisphere (see
Fig. 30).

- During post-perihelion, quiet solar conditions: As the solar activity
  decreased over the course of the escort phase, the photo-ionisation
  frequency at a given heliocentric distance is lower pre-compared with
  post-perihelion; the relative importance of photo-ionisation compared
  with electron-impact ionisation decreases. The observed plasma density
  at postperihelion is higher in the summer/autumn (southern) hemisphere
  compared with the winter/spring (northern) hemisphere. The strong
  electron fluxes over the winter/spring hemisphere did not compensate
  for the weaker neutral density (Heritier et al. 2018), as it did
  during pre-perihelion. The multi-instrument analysis was applied
  during the return from the cometary tail excursion in April 2016. The
  very good agreement between the observed and modelled plasma density
  demonstrates the robustness of the model over a large range of
  cometocentric distances up to 80 km (Heritier et al. 2018).
- During solar events: A Co-rotating Interaction Region (CIR, see also
  Sect. 2.4) hit comet 67P over several solar rotations in summer 2016
  (Hajra et al. 2018a). The multiinstrument analysis was applied to the
  disturbed cometary environment in July and August 2016. The relative
  importance between photo-ionisation and electron-impact was found to
  be highly variable, with the latter sometimes largely dominating the
  former and increasing by one order of magnitude during quiet and
  disturbed times. The very good agreement

Fig. 31 Top: Time series of the ROSINA-COPS measured neutral number
density (full line) and cometocentric distance of the spacecraft (dashed
line). Middle: Time series of the photo-ionisation frequency (blue
curve) and total ionisation frequencies ( ) (red dots). Seasonal
variations are colour coded in the top panel with pink for spring
(northern hemisphere) and yellow for autumn (southern hemisphere).
Bottom: Time series of the RPC-MIP measured electron number density
(pink dots), smoothed using a 5-minute average (purple) and RPC-LAP
derived total ion densities (green). Simplified modelled ionospheric
densities (Eq. (9)) using photo-ionisation only (blue) and both
photo-ionisation and electron-impact ionisation (red), assuming outflow
velocity from 400 m/s (upper bound) to 700 m/s (lower bound). The solar
wind dynamic pressure as predicted by the Tao et al. (2005) model is
plotted in green (middle panel) to illustrate the effect of the CIR
impact. From Heritier et al. (2018), reproduced with permission ©ESO

between the observed and modelled plasma densities attests that the
enhancement seen in the plasma density during the CIR was driven by an
increase in the electron-impact ionisation frequency (see Fig. 31), and
was not due to a plasma compression driven by the increase in the solar
wind dynamic pressure (Heritier et al. 2018; Hajra et al. 2018a).

• At the end of the Rosetta mission: Rosetta made a controlled landing
on the nucleus’ surface which offered the opportunity for taking the
first-ever plasma measurements all the way down to the surface (Heritier
et al. 2018). Along the descent which covered a large range of latitudes
and longitudes over the northern, spring hemisphere, the
multi-instrument analysis showed that electron-impact ionisation was the
dominant source of the cometary plasma. However, the margin of errors
was large due to large uncertainties in the gas bulk velocity. A refined
approach was developed for which the ion bulk velocity is no longer
constant, but equal to the expansion velocity of the adiabatic gas and
varies from 400 m/s close to the surface to 800 m/s (terminal flow
velocity) at a cometocentric distance of about 20 km. Apart from a
slight overestimation when Rosetta was over the nucleus’ neck, modelled
plasma density from the refined approach agrees extremely well with the
cross-calibrated RPC-MIP/RPC-LAP densities. The peak in the plasma
density profile, predicted to be located at twice the apparent radius of
the nucleus (see Sect. 2.2.4) is clearly apparent in the observed plasma
density dataset.

In summary, the multi-instrument analysis of the plasma density
developed for a local outgassing rate between and s-1 (that is, less
than 2–4 AU for comet 67P Heritier et al. 2018) and cometocentric
distances close to the nucleus (< 100 km), has shown that the cometary
plasma is produced through photo-ionisation of solar EUV radiation and
electronimpact ionisation; the relative difference in the sources varies
with season, hemisphere, solar

65 Page 64 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 32 Schematic of the multi-instrument analysis applied to FUV
emissions. From Stephenson et al. (2021), reproduced with permission
©ESO

activity and solar events. The plasma is lost through transport. The
ions are strongly coupled to the neutrals, as the region analysed is
below or close to the ion exobase (Galand et al. 2016). The ions do not
seem to suffer any significant acceleration, at least if there is any,
it is limited and does not affect the cometary plasma density. Very
close to the nucleus (a few km above the surface), the analysis is
improved by taking into account the neutral expanded flow (Heritier et
al. 2017b). The robust multi-instrument approach is a relevant tool not
only for the analysis of the plasma source and loss, but also for the
analysis of solar events, as shown with the example of the CIR events in
summer 2016.

3.2.2 Multi-instrument Analysis of the FUV Emissions

To enhance the science return from the Alice FUV spectrometer, a
multi-instrument analysis has been applied to the observed FUV emissions
from atomic hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon (Galand et al. 2020; Stephenson
et al. 2021). This analysis combines gas, particle, and light
measurements, taken simultaneously, from in situ and remote-sensing
instruments onboard Rosetta, utilising a simple, physics-based model.
The multi-instrument analysis has been applied to establish the source
and identify the nature of the FUV emissions, as well as to provide
further constraints on the composition of the neutral coma. The model
focusses on dissociative excitation of cometary molecules by electron
impact (see Sect. 2.5) which has been identified as a source of FUV
emissions at comet 67P (e.g. Feldman et al. 2015, 2016, 2017). The
brightness of an FUV emission line from electron impact is given by Eq.
(15). As the analysis is focussing only on low outgassing rates (Q <
2×1026 s−1), the differential flux, J(E), of energetic electrons does
not undergo any significant energy degradation in the coma and can be
assumed to be constant throughout the column along the line of sight of
the FUV spectrograph (Chaufray et al. 2017; Heritier 2018). As such, the
simplified version Eq. (16) can be used to calculate the brightness of
the modelled emissions.

A schematic outlining the multi-instrument analysis is shown in Fig. 32.
The observed brightness from the Alice spectrograph is compared with the
modelling brightness. The latter is derived from observations of the
column density of the major neutral species along the line of sight and
the differential flux of suprathermal electrons. By combining coincident
in situ and remote-sensing measurements, uncertainty due to the
variability of the neutral gas and electron flux is minimized.

This analysis has been applied to two different viewing geometries:
nadir viewing and limb viewing. When viewing nadir, the composition and
density of the neutral gas along the line of sight are well constrained
as the major species do not have an extended source and the column of
gas between the nucleus and the Rosetta spacecraft is coming from the

same region on the surface. Cases have been selected when the surface of
the nucleus was in shadow, reducing contamination from solar flux
reflected off the nucleus. It is possible to extrapolate from local
measurements of total number density by ROSINA/COPS and neutral
composition by ROSINA/DFMS (Balsiger et al. 2007), assuming a profile as
observed (Hässig et al. 2015; Bieler et al. 2015b). Measurements from
VIRTIS (Coradini et al. 2007) can also be used for deriving the column
density of H2O, CO, and CO2.

For limb viewing, the column density of H2O, CO, and CO2 can be derived
from observations by the sub-mm spectrograph, MIRO (Gulkis et al. 2007)
and the infrared spectrometer VIRTIS. However, the column density of O2
cannot be probed remotely with these instruments. It is also not
possible to extrapolate it from in-situ composition measurements, as the
neutral gas along the line of sight originates from many regions of the
nucleus.

The emission frequency , for a given neutral species l and emission line
X is given by:

(20) 

where is the emission cross-section of the emission line X due to
dissociative excitation of the molecular species l by an energetic
electron of energy E. A review of the relevant emission cross sections
used is given in (Stephenson et al. 2021). is the suprathermal electron
spectral flux, introduced already in Eq. (18) and corrected to the
spacecraft potential as given in Eq. (19) (see Sect. 3.2.1). is the
energy threshold for the dissociative excitation process (15–25 eV). is
the maximum energy considered, typically around 200 eV for the observed
RPC-IES spectral fluxes.

As well as emissions from dissociative excitation, photodissociation of
cometary molecules generates emissions in the FUV. These are modelled as
discussed in Stephenson et al. (2021). Measurements of the solar photon
flux by TIMED/SEE orbiting the Earth is extrapolated to the position of
67P assuming a drop off, where is the heliocentric distance. As 67P and
Earth were at most times out of solar phase during the Rosetta escort
mission (except in February 2015), the TIMED/SEE measurements are taken
from the same Carrington longitude as 67P for each observation. The
neutral coma has been assumed to be optically thin, which again is only
valid at large heliocentric distances.

From the multi-instrument analysis of nadir-viewing emissions, Galand et
al. (2020) and Stephenson et al. (2021) established that dissociative
excitation is the major source of FUV atomic emissions at large
heliocentric distances (see Fig. 33a). This is true both over the
northern, summer hemisphere where H2O was the dominant outgassing
species and over the southern, winter hemisphere where CO2 played a
larger role compared to water. The relative contributions of the neutral
molecules to the emission lines are very different between the northern
and southern hemispheres, for large heliocentric distances, but in both
cases dissociative excitation by electron impact was the key driver of
the emissions.

The multi-instrument analysis applied to limb-viewing observations
showed that the variation in the FUV emission brightnesses is correlated
with the variation in the electrons measured in situ at Rosetta (Figs.
33b and 33c; Galand et al. 2020; Stephenson et al. 2021). This
demonstrated that the energetic electrons responsible for the FUV
emissions are not produced locally, but rather have undergone a
large-scale acceleration (see Sects. 2.3.2, 4.1 and Galand et al. 2020).
This analysis has revealed the auroral nature of the FUV atomic
emissions seen by Rosetta and the relevance of using OI 1356 Å as a
remote-sensing tracer of solar wind electron variability.

65 Page 66 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 33 (a) Comparison of modelled (black) and observed (magenta) atomic
oxygen emissions for seven cases in the northern hemisphere of 67P with
a nadir viewing. Measured and modelled points for a given date and time
are offset for visibility. From Galand et al. (2020). (b) and (c)
Comparison of modelled (solid lines) and observed (crosses) FUV
emissions during a corotating interaction region at comet 67P on 4th Aug
2016. Each time interval of consecutive measurements is plotted in its
own color to better distinguish them. Both from Stephenson et
al. (2021), reproduced with permission ©ESO. Further atomic emission
lines to those shown have been modelled in both of the above studies

3.3 Numerical Models

By accompanying 67P for two years, the Rosetta orbiter provided a wealth
of fresh new information during various stages of the comet’s life, but
as with all single-spacecraft missions, it could only be at one spot in
time and space, and possibly the most intriguing plasma physics in the
solar wind – comet interaction unfolded partially out of reach of
Rosetta instruments. It makes the coupling of observational and
modelling efforts a necessity. For instance, while Rosetta was close to
the comet nucleus investigating the diamagnetic cavity (Sect. 4.6 and
Goetz et al. 2016a,b; Henri et al. 2017; Hajra et al. 2018a), it was
impossible to tell how the upstream solar wind variability influenced
the cometary plasma environment (e.g. did a local or external physical
mechanism cause the observed variability of the boundary of the
diamagnetic cavity?).

Over the last decades the numerical methods used to advance theory and
to analyse, interpret and predict measurements have been revolutionised.
The increasing availability and expansion of computational resources has
made possible the implementation of more precise and complete numerical
models at larger spatial scales.

Numerical models in plasma physics, and by extension those to study the
comet’s interaction with the surrounding plasma environment, can be
divided roughly into three broad numerical approaches (e.g. Ledvina et
al. 2008): (1) models that treat all simulated plasma species as one or
multiple fluids; (2) models that include some of the plasma species as
(com-

Table 5 Summary table for the most common numerical models and
references to works that use them. gi,e are the gyroradii of the ions
and electrons, respectively

putational) particles, so-called ‘hybrid’ codes; (3) models that
represent all plasma species using computational particles, so-called
‘fully kinetic’ codes. These categories are summarised in Table 5. Note
that these categories are only one non-unique attempt to classify the
numerical models used in cometary science. In reality, there is a wide
spectrum of models often blending the borders we outlined above.
Finally, there are some approaches that do not clearly fit in any of the
three categories, such as test-particle or semi-analytical models, whose
inputs are sometimes based on outputs of the other three categories.

Different numerical models provide different advantages and
disadvantages. Typically, a less complete/self-consistent physical model
translates into a lower computational burden, a more efficient use of
computational resources. Some physical mechanisms or fully
time-dependent simulations (as opposed to, e.g., a steady-state model
with fixed neutral background atmosphere and solar wind conditions)
might be almost impossible to implement in an efficient manner without
losing self-consistency. This may be due to constraints on available
computational resources, and the vast range of time-scales to be
resolved (e.g., ions collisionally coupled to neutral gas less than 1 km
s−1 in speed, versus electron speeds of several 1000 km s−1), or to a
limited understanding of the underlying physics. In reality, the
‘amount’ of physics included in the model is always a compromise against
the amount of available resources. Similarly, by enabling the study of a
specific process or physical aspect in greater detail, 1-D and 2-D
approaches vs 3-D approaches may bring valuable insights into the
physics of cometary plasma environments at reduced cost. In the
following paragraphs we attempt to give a brief overview of how
numerical models, here mostly 3-D, have been applied in preparation to,
during and after the Rosetta mission. We refer the reader to the
complementary sections for a more in-depth discussion of the science
covered in these works.

As Rosetta intended to accompany 67P throughout all outgassing stages of
the comet, predicting the global structure of its plasma environment is
key to understanding where to look for the most exciting science.
Supported by several decades of experience investigating other comets
and solar system bodies [e.g., Gombosi et al. 1996 describe mass-loading
near comet 1P/Halley; Jia et al. 2008 model the effect of neutral jets
during the Deep Space 1 Comet 19P/Borrelly flyby], (multi-fluid) MHD
efforts have paved the way. Needing relatively little computational
resources, they can resolve larger physical domains. For example, Huang
et al. (2016) modelled a computational domain on the order of 106 km to
investigate the plasma and neutral gas environment of 67P near
perihelion. The model extended the single fluid MHD model by Hansen et
al. (2007), driven by the need to reproduce effects arising from the
gyration of the cometary ions and the deflection of the solar wind
protons (Rubin et al. 2014b,a, 2015).

The next step is to include ion dynamics self-consistently. This is
achieved with kinetic hybrid models, where ions are treated as
statistical macroparticles and electrons as a massless
charge-neutralising MHD fluid, building on the knowledge accumulated on
the plasma

environments of various solar system bodies, not necessarily cometary
(see e.g. Bagdonat and Motschmann 2002; Kallio et al. 2006; Müller et
al. 2011; Holmström 2013). More specifically driven by the Rosetta
teams, recent improvements in cometary hybrid models include, e.g., more
detailed models of photoionisation, solar wind charge exchange and
electron ionisation processes and their respective effects on the
creation of large-scale boundaries such as bow shock and cometopause
regions (see Simon Wedlund et al. 2017, and Sect. 4.2), the ion dynamics
of mass loading (Behar et al. 2016a), and analysis of the observed
pickup ion energy spectra and shock-like structures (Lindkvist et
al. 2018; Gunell et al. 2018; Alho et al. 2019, 2021). Hybrid approaches
have also proven successful to investigate the effects of solar wind
variability on the global structure of 67P’s plasma environment
(Koenders et al. 2013, 2015, 2016a; Alho et al. 2021), in particular
during the weak and intermediately outgassing regimes. Comparing
measurements with hybrid numerical simulations, Koenders et al. (2016b)
studied the generation of low-frequency waves in the comet-solar wind
interaction region, including the “singing comet waves” (see Sect.
2.3.7), showing how they arise from initial cometary pick-up ions
perpendicular to the solar wind flow and along the IMF direction,
triggering a modified ion-Weibel instability. In the most recent
iterations of these models, extended boundary conditions (to include
mass-loading, charge-exchange and ion productions over the large
upstream region extending up to millions of km in the subsolar
direction) as well as asymmetric outgassing driven by the nucleus
illumination have been included (Koenders et al. 2013; Alho et
al. 2021). Structures that are possible to describe with these models
without much loss of ion scale physics include for example bow shock and
ion collisionopause down to the diamagnetic cavity and the ambipolar
electric field (see Sects. 2.3.2, 4.2, 4.6, and 4.5).

Modelling both electron and ion species as particles, fully kinetic
approaches are in theory able to present the most complete physical
model. However, it comes at a significant computational cost,
restricting present-day global simulations to 67P’s plasma environment
during its weakly and moderately active periods. Using four plasma
species (solar wind protons and electrons; cometary water ions and
electrons), Deca et al. (2017) concluded that the dynamical interaction
of a weakly outgassing comet is representative of a four-fluid coupled
system and they were able to identify the origins of the warm and
suprathermal electron distributions observed by Rosetta. Global
particle-in-cell simulations disentangled the convoluted observed
electron distributions and showed that the ambipolar electric field
temporarily traps and accelerates electrons near the comet without the
need for wave-particle or turbulent heating mechanisms (Divin et
al. 2020; Sishtla et al. 2019). This also leads to the mechanism
responsible for the far-ultraviolet aurora identified at comet 67P
(Galand et al. 2020). As no collisions are included, the strict
applicability of the method is as yet confined to low-activity comets
and/or regions far from the nucleus. Nevertheless, considering the
limited size of the collisional domain at 67P (see discussions on
exobase and collisionopause in Sects. 2.3.5 and 4.5), the
particle-in-cell results can be expected to well represent the
comet-solar wind interaction during the Rosetta mission.

A second set of fully kinetic models focused on the plasma environment
of the Rosetta spacecraft itself. For example, Johansson et al. (2020)
analysed the charging behaviour of Rosetta and Wattieaux et al. (2020)
characterised the response of the RPC-MIP instrument to different
electron populations. A similar study for RPC-ICA was performed by
Bergman et al. (2020). All are crucial to aid our interpretation of the
in situ plasma measurements, which in turn are dependent on the
spacecraft charging and the local plasma environment (disturbed by the
spacecraft, including solar arrays, booms and the relative position of
the instruments). Finally, note that a fully kinetic description for the
complex electron dynamics can provide an effective electron closure
relation and identify where an isotropic singleelectron fluid Ohm’s law
approximation can be used, and where it fails (Deca et al. 2019).

Fig. 34 Illustration of the boundaries formed by the interaction of the
solar wind with the coma that have been observed during spacecraft
flybys of comets. All of these boundaries are thought to be permanent
features of the interaction when the outgassing rate is high enough. The
grey shaded region is the portion of the comet solar wind interaction
explored by Rosetta between 2015 May and December

The latter can then be used as input for less computationally demanding
numerical approaches.

As mentioned above, there are a multitude of numerical approaches that
do not clearly fit in any of the categories outlined above. Most
prominently in these group are semi-analytical models and test-particle
codes. The latter have been successful to characterise, e.g., the solar
wind ion cavity (Behar et al. 2017) and suprathermal electrons near the
nucleus of comet 67P (Madanian et al. 2016). Direct simulation Monte
Carlo methods have been used to characterise the observed non-uniformity
of the cometary neutral coma (Bieler et al. 2015b; Fougere et al. 2016a;
Combi et al. 2020).

4 Large Scale Structures

The interaction of the solar wind with comets is unique compared to how
the solar wind interacts with unmagnetized planetary atmospheres. This
is because the high neutral outgassing rate of comets and the free
expansion of the atmosphere causes this interaction to begin at great
distances from the comet through the process of mass loading of the
solar wind. The result is large scale structures in the form of
boundaries, regions, and electric fields that have been observed by
spacecraft flybys of comets and by Rosetta during its extended escort of
67P. Boundaries observed by a spacecraft at a comet can be permanent
features, solar wind and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) boundaries,
or small-scale transient features created by instabilities or waves
(Cravens 1989). Figure 34 illustrates the relative positions of the
boundaries discussed in the following sections.

4.1 Electric Fields

Large scale plasma phenomena can usually be described using a fluid
model. The main assumption needed is that the characteristic scale size
of the phenomenon being investigated

Fig. 35 Illustration of the electric fields in the inner part of the
coma of a comet that has not developed a diamagnetic cavity. From
(Gunell 2020)

is much larger than an ion gyroradius. On smaller scales, either
concerning physics such as the formation of pick-up ring distributions
or where the characteristic gradients in the system are smaller than an
ion gyroradius, electric fields become important. The same is true in
the absence of a background magnetic field, as e.g. in the diamagnetic
cavity.

When a comet plasma cloud is small compared to a pick up ion gyroradius,
ions may be locally unmagnetised. Locally produced ions will move along
the solar wind electric field on these scales. We know from conservation
of momentum and observations that the solar wind will be deflected in
the direction opposite to the cometary ions (see also Sect. 2.3.1 and
Behar et al. 2016b, 2018b; Broiles et al. 2015). To understand the local
plasma dynamics on this scale, it is usually helpful to look at the
solar wind electric field in the local comet reference frame. The same
is true for planet systems that are small compared to the pick up ion
gyroradius such as Mars, where a plume of pick up ions is seen along the
solar wind electric field direction (Dong et al. 2015).

Another important electric field comes into play when the newly added
ions are no longer just a small perturbation to the solar wind flow. The
newly born ions and electrons move in different directions along and
against the solar wind electric field, so if the solar wind cannot
easily displace the accumulating charges along the field line a
polarisation electric field will build up, preventing further charge
accumulation (Brenning et al. 1991; Nilsson et al. 2018). In particular
this electric field arises in the case of unmagnetised ions and
magnetised electrons, as was typically the case at comet 67P during the
Rosetta mission. This is illustrated in Fig. 35, where Epol shows the
polarisation electric field. The effect of the polarisation electric
field has been modelled for barium release experiments (Brenning et
al. 1991), a model later adapted to the situation at comet 67P (Nilsson
et al. 2018). Gunell et al. (2019) further studied the role of the
polarisation electric field using electrostatic PIC simulations. Such
small scale plasma clouds with polarisation electric field effects have
also been discussed based on MAVEN observations from Mars (Halekas et
al. 2016). One prediction of the model is a significant anti-Sunward
flow of the pick up ions, rather than along the inferred solar wind
electric field direction. This is in agreement with observations

(Nilsson et al. 2015b, 2017). One can regard it as that the frozen-in
electrons drag the ions with them, an interpretation also used by
Dubinin et al. (1993) describing a similar situation in the magnetotail
of Mars.

A simple model of the polarisation electric field (Nilsson et al. 2018)
predicts that the electric field should be quite uniform inside the
cometary plasma cloud. If so, the energy spectra of cometary ions moving
along the electric field can directly be related to the distance between
the measurement and the production region of the ions. The energy
spectra can thus be used to remotely probe the plasma cloud structure.
Nilsson et al. (2018) suggested that an abrupt increase of fluxes at
energies above 1 keV could be related to the bow shock. Such a remote
detection of the large scale bow shock close to perihelion was later
reproduced in a hybrid model by Alho et al. (2019). The shape of the
energy spectra thus reflects how the production of ions changes with
distance, and abrupt changes in the energy spectra corresponds to abrupt
changes in either production or the electric and magnetic fields and
associated ion transport.

As the cometary plasma cloud grows larger and denser, the solar wind
electric field is more efficiently shielded from the interior of the
plasma cloud (Nilsson et al. 2018). Locally produced pick up ions are
then less accelerated, possibly explaining the lower ion energies
observed inside the comet magnetosphere around perihelion (Nilsson et
al. 2017). This effect occurs at similar times and in regions where
collisions also start to play a more significant role (see also Sect.
4.5). The stronger shielding of the solar wind electric field should
however not lead to any clear boundary in the plasma, and accelerated
ions are still present, just at lower energies.

Closer to the nucleus newborn, hot photoelectrons and a strong density
gradient give rise to a significant ambipolar electric field
accelerating ions radially outward (Odelstad et al. 2018; Berciˇ c et
al. ˇ 2018) (Eambi in Fig. 35). In a sense this is similar to the
polarisation electric field, with the hot photoelectrons dragging the
ions with them. However, while the radially directed ambipolar field is
caused by the electrons having a higher temperature than the ions, the
polarisation field is a secondary field caused by electrons and ions
moving in different directions as a result of the solar wind convective
electric field. Figure 35 illustrates the directions of the three
different contributions to the electric field and the different scales
of electron and ion gyroradii, which causes the charge separation behind
the polarisation electric field. The presence of several distinct
electron populations also means that the polarisation electric field
accelerates some electrons inward (Madanian et al. 2017; Deca et
al. 2017). The main source of hot electrons is believed to be
photoelectrons due to EUV ionisation and secondary electrons due to
electron impact ionisation, but additional heating is needed to explain
the highest observed electron temperatures (see Sect. 2.3.3).

Rosetta observations showed that low energy ions observed close to the
nucleus are moving away from the nucleus with a velocity well above that
of the neutral gas (Odelstad et al. 2018). The Rosetta observations were
made also well inside the collisionopause illustrated in Fig. 34, (see
also Sect. 4.5). The ions can thus attain a speed of typically 2 to 4
km/s also inside the collisionopause, which in turn affects the
collision cross section which is energy dependent and thus also the
position of the collision dominated region (Mandt et al. 2019).

Rosetta observations also showed that electrons in the inner coma
exhibit an excess of their suprathermal component as compared to what is
expected from local production of photo electrons (Broiles et al. 2016a;
Myllys et al. 2019), which result from inward electron acceleration by
this ambipolar electric field (Madanian et al. 2017; Deca et al. 2017).

In the Rosetta observations, the most common flow direction for cometary
ions with an energy below about 60 eV as measured by RPC-ICA (Berciˇ c
et al. ˇ 2018; Nilsson et al. 2017) was a radial outflow in YCSEQ–ZCSEQ
plane with a significant anti-Sunward component. This

65 Page 72 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

represents a combination of the influence of the polarisation electric
field (anti-Sunward) and the ambipolar electric field (radial
expansion). Note that the energy limit given here is after acceleration
by the typically negative spacecraft potential (Odelstad et al. 2017)
which means that the typical ion energy range when compensating for the
spacecraft potential (Bergman et al. 2020) was in the energy range
typically up to about 40 eV.

Other regions where quasi-stationary electric fields may be important
are at sharp boundaries. Of the main boundaries shown in Fig. 34 the bow
shock (Sect. 4.2) and the diamagnetic cavity (Sect. 4.6) are the ones
most likely to exhibit electric field signatures.

In a coma the ambipolar electric field (see also Sect. 2.3.2) is present
as soon as electron collisions are low enough to allow for a hot
electron component. Ambipolar acceleration has been observed inside the
diamagnetic cavity (Odelstad et al. 2018). At the diamagnetic cavity
boundary, which is rather sharp at about 25 km width (Goetz et
al. 2016a; Neubauer 1988), further transients can be expected due to the
discontinuity of the mobility of electrons and ions from the field-free
to the magnetised region outside the cavity. Studies of this are
ongoing, but the effect of a sometimes abruptly changing spacecraft
potential is yet to be fully taken into account for the interpretation
of Rosetta data (Masunaga et al. 2019; Bergman et al. 2020; Johansson et
al. 2020).

4.2 Bow Shock

Shocks form in a plasma flow upstream of obstacles, if the relative
velocity of the plasma and the obstacle exceeds the characteristic speed
of waves in the plasma. The compressional wave which forms in front of
the obstacle steepens when more plasma comes in from upstream (see for
example, Balogh and Treumann 2013; Burgess and Scholer 2015). A
multitude of instabilities and wave modes are possible. Typically
though, bow shocks grow from fast magnetosonic waves in the
supermagnetosonic solar wind. The dissipation that causes heating of the
solar wind as it passes the shock is caused by secondary instabilities
leading to waves on smaller and faster scales, involving both ions and
electrons.

Early theory showed that hydrodynamic (Biermann et al. 1967) and
magnetohydrodynamic (Flammer and Mendis 1991) models of mass-loading
break down already when the fraction of incorporated cometary ions reach
a few per cent, unless a discontinuity corresponding to a bow shock is
introduced. The agreement between these models and observations of the
bow shock of the highly active comet 1P/Halley is reasonable (Neubauer
et al. 1986).

Mass-loading slows down the solar wind upstream of the shock, leading to
a lower Mach number than in the undisturbed solar wind or at planetary
bow shocks. The magnetosonic Mach numbers of the Giotto bow shock
crossings of comet 1P/Halley were computed by Coates et al. (1990) and
were found to be between 1.1 and 1.8 inbound and between 1.6 and 1.7
outbound. This would make the shock marginally supercritical, but
criticality also depends on the shock normal angle to the magnetic field
(Balogh and Treumann 2013). One would in any case expect cometary shocks
to have more subcritical properties than the bow shocks at planets.
Subcritical shocks rely more on dissipation at the shock itself, whereas
supercritical shocks reflect a significant fraction of the solar wind
particles back upstream, which leads to instabilities, wave growth, and
dissipation of energy in the foreshock region. In a single fluid MHD
description, shocks fulfil the Rankine-Hugoniot conditions. In a
multicomponent plasma these conditions need to be modified (Motschmann
et al. 1991b,a), and the different ion species behave differently. This
changes further when kinetic effects are included (Fahr and Siewert
2015).

Comet bow shocks are more diffuse and wide than the bow shocks known
from planets. This was found when the International Cometary Explorer
(ICE) spacecraft flew by comet

21P/Giacobini-Zinner in 1985 (Smith et al. 1986). Bame et al. (1986)
observed that the transitions were smooth and gradual in magnetic field
and particle observations, but the wave instrument on ICE measured sharp
boundaries where the wave activity increased in the same way as at
planetary bow shocks, and an intense broadband spectrum of waves
indicative of energy dissipation was found (Scarf et al. 1986b). As
expected for shocks, the width of the bow shock was not proportional to
the distance to the comet for comets 21P/Giacobini-Zinner and 1P/Halley.
The widths were approximately the same, (3–4) × 104 km, whereas the
cometocentric distance to the shock differed by an order of magnitude.
It was 1.27×105 km at comet 21P/Giacobini-Zinner and 1.15×106 km at
comet 1P/Halley (Neubauer et al. 1986). The results obtained by the two
Vega spacecraft were similar to those of Giotto (Gringauz et al. 1986a).
Both Vega 2 and Giotto passed through a quasi-parallel shock on the
outbound legs of their flybys (Galeev et al. 1986; Coates 1995).

The observations of comet 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup, visited by the Giotto
spacecraft in 1992, yielded similar results with sharp transitions in
both field and waves when the spacecraft was outbound. On the inbound
leg only the wave measurements showed a sharp transition, while the
increase in magnetic field was gradual (Neubauer et al. 1993b). It was
later seen in models and observations at comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko
that bow shocks can be very asymmetric at intermediate cometary
outgassing rates. The outgassing rate at comet 26P was estimated to 6.7
× 1027 s−1 (Neubauer et al. 1993b), which is similar to comet 67P at
perihelion and above the outgassing rate during the infant bow shock
observations at comet 67P (see the outgassing rates in Fig. 3 in Sect.
2.1.1). This would place comet 26P between comet 67P and comets
21P/Giacobini-Zinner and 1P/Halley both in terms of outgassing rates and
in bow shock symmetry. Asymmetries in bow shock thickness may also be
caused by outgassing asymmetries as shown by simulations (Huang et
al. 2016).

The last of the pre-Rosetta in situ bow shock observations happened in
2001 at comet 19P/Borelly. The Deep Space 1 spacecraft detected a bow
shock 1.47 × 105 km from the nucleus (Richter et al. 2011). The observed
magnetic compression ratio was 2.5, and the magnetic field fluctuations
were seen to increase as the spacecraft moved into the region downstream
of the shock.

Before Rosetta arrived at comet 67P, simulations predicted that the
standoff distance of the bow shock would be a few thousand kilometres
(Koenders et al. 2013, 2015). Simon Wedlund et al. (2017) performed a
series of hybrid simulations in which first only photoionisation was
included and then also electron impact ionisation and charge-exchange
processes. The result was that with each addition of an ionisation
process, the bow shock moved farther upstream up to a maximum standoff
distance of more than 6000 km. Rosetta ventured out to a cometocentric
distance of about 1500 km during its dayside excursion in September
2015. Given that this distance was much below the predicted standoff
distance, it was no surprise that the bow shock was not found, and it
was thought that Rosetta had not observed the bow shock at all during
the mission (Mandt et al. 2016; Simon Wedlund et al. 2017). In fact the
magnetic field strength did not decrease significantly even at 1500 km
(as compared to 100 km), indicating that Rosetta was not near the bow
shock, where lower field values are expected (Goetz et al. 2017).
Recently, the non-detection of a bow shock was vindicated by Alho et
al. (2021) who took into account a more realistic asymmetric outgassing
based on the semi-empirical model of Hansen et al. (2016) and an
extended mass-loading boundary condition (see also Sect. 3.3). These
authors estimated with a kinetic hybrid plasma model that the bow shock
subsolar standoff distance was increased by a factor 2 to 3 with respect
to non-asymmetric outgassing conditions, reaching about 18,000 km for
67P around perihelion. They showed also that simulated pickup ion
observations deep in the coma display spectral features in energy that
may be interpreted with the simulations as the presence of

65 Page 74 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 36 The infant bow shock at comet 67P. In the left-hand panel the
red circles mark the position of comet 67P on each of the 152 days on
which shocked solar wind plasma was observed (Goetz et al. 2020a). The
second panel shows the magnetic flux density magnitude in a hybrid
simulation of the infant bow shock. The light blue circle marks the
position of the nucleus. The three panels on the right-hand side show
from the top: the energy spectrum of the light ions, the electron energy
spectrum, and the components and magnitude of B as observed by the
Rosetta spacecraft (Gunell et al. 2018). The vertical light blue and
purple lines mark when the spacecraft entered and exited the region with
shocked plasma in an infant bow shock encounter. From (Gunell 2020)

shock-like structures far upstream of the spacecraft. Both asymmetric
outgassing and IMF clock angle were found to drive these spectral
features.

The dayside excursion took place when the comet was close to perihelion,
and the simulations mentioned above all concerned conditions
corresponding to a comet near perihelion. However, far away from the
Sun, the comet has only a very thin atmosphere, and its size is smaller
than the proton gyroradius (∼ 103 km for a solar wind proton in the
comet frame of reference and a 4 nT magnetic field). Hence, one would
not expect a comet to have a bow shock at large heliocentric distances.
Between the no-shock situation far away from the sun and the fully
developed shock at perihelion, the bow shock forms. Lindkvist et
al. (2018) performed hybrid simulations of comet 67P, comparing two
different ionisation rates. In the simulation with the lower ionisation
rate, a very asymmetric “shock-like structure” formed, extending far
into the z < 0 plane in CSE coordinates. In the CSE coordinate system
the z axis is parallel to the convectional electric field of the solar
wind. The purpose of the simulations by Lindkvist et al. (2018) was to
study energy conversion at the comet. It was found that the shock-like
structure acts as an electromagnetic generator in the same way as
Earth’s bow shock. In a generator E · J < 0 and energy is transferred
from the particles to the fields. The shock-like structure also has the
other properties of a collisionless shock, a rapidly increasing magnetic
field, and a slowing down and heating of the solar wind, to the extent
it can be modelled with the available resolution and in a hybrid
simulation that does not include electron physics.

Gunell et al. (2018) found that under specific circumstances heated
protons could be detected near the nucleus. Because of the similarity of
these observations with numerical simulations, they introduced the
concept of a highly asymmetric and unstable “infant bow shock” to
explain the presence of these protons. Goetz et al. (2020a) performed a
statistical study of the complete data set for the whole mission, and
found that this shocked solar wind plasma had been observed on 152 days.

Figure 36 shows a summary of these observations. The left-hand panel
shows where along the comet orbit the observations took place. The first
occurrence was at a heliocentric

distance just below 3 AU. When the comet got closer than 1.7 AU from the
Sun the infant bow shock sightings ceased. This is consistent with the
bow shock moving outward and sunward as the outgassing and ionisation
increased, and Rosetta was then no longer in the region with shocked
plasma. The infant bow shock returned after perihelion. It is seen in
Fig. 36 that the bow shock sightings are shifted somewhat toward larger
heliocentric distances on the outward leg of the comet’s journey when
the outgassing rate was higher (Hansen et al. 2016). It was found by
Goetz et al. (2020a) that the infant bow shock is seen more often at
intermediate outgassing rates.

The middle panel of Fig. 36 shows the magnitude of B in the x–z plane in
a hybrid simulation, where the x axis is directed toward the Sun and the
z axis parallel to the solar wind electric field. It is seen how the
infant bow shock extends far into the negative z half plane and how the
magnetic field increases at the shock, and continues to oscillate on the
downstream side. On the right-hand side of Fig. 36 are three panels
showing an example of Rosetta crossing the infant bow shock. Here, the
spacecraft moves with respect to the infant bow shock because the shock
turns due to a change in the solar wind magnetic field direction. This
also changes the direction of the electric field, and hence of the z
axis in the middle panel of Fig. 36. An example of when this happened is
marked by the light blue vertical line in Fig. 36 (see Gunell et
al. 2018, for a detailed description).

An infant bow shock can be seen in figures from the simulation by
Koenders et al. (2016a) although at the time it was not called by that
name. The simulation was used to model the close flyby of comet 67P on
28 March 2015. Rosetta was close to the nucleus and the infant bow shock
farther out, which is why it was not observed that day. Edberg et
al. (2016b) studied the impact of corotating interaction regions on
comet 67P, but they also found another feature. Edberg et al. (2016b)
describe it thus: “On 24 December 2015, when the magnetic field
orientation has changed, the solar wind flux is decreased and the
suprathermal electrons increased significantly. It is possible that
these signatures also indicate the crossing of a plasma boundary, which
builds up as the solar wind dynamic pressure increases.” This can now be
identified as one of the first encounters of the infant bow shock and it
is part of the infant bow shock database used in the statistical study
by Goetz et al. (2020a).

Since the Rosetta spacecraft was located downstream of the bow shock
when the comet was less than 1.7 AU from the Sun, no in situ
observations could be made for a considerable length of time. A method
for remote detection of a bow shock was suggested by Nilsson et
al. (2018), who observed that if cometary ions are accelerated by a
constant electric field, the energy at which they reach the spacecraft
is proportional to the distance to the place where they were created by
ionisation. The ion energy spectrum is therefore determined by the 1/r2
slope of the ionisation source. Nilsson et al. (2018) applied this
method to Rosetta data from 16 June 2015 at approximately 1.4 AU and
found the 1/r2 relationship to hold up to an energy of ∼ 1 keV, which
corresponded to a distance of 4000 km, and they predicted that that was
the position of the bow shock. The method has been evaluated by
simulations, which yield consistent results (Alho et al. 2019).

The physics of collisionless shocks is complicated, and it involves a
number of different types of waves on both large and small scales. A
complete understanding of it would require both observations and
computer simulations that treat both electrons and ions kinetically and
resolves all relevant scales (Balogh and Treumann 2013). At comets the
situation is complicated further by the presence of several ion species,
and also the neutral atmosphere has a significant influence at least for
some regimes. The way forward from an observational point of view is to
make simultaneous measurements at multiple points in space as in the
upcoming Comet Interceptor mission (Snodgrass and Jones 2019), which
will make a fast flythrough of a cometary plasma. To obtain a truly
detailed view of the bow shock of a comet

65 Page 76 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 37 Analytical trajectories of solar wind protons, Sun to the right
and upstream magnetic field directed upward, in the same plane. Around
the nucleus at the centre, a region is created in which solar wind ions
cannot penetrate. According to the model, these trajectories simply
scale with the activity and the heliocentric distance. From Behar et
al. (2018a), reproduced with permission ©ESO

one would need a multi-spacecraft mission that accompanies the comet
over an extended period of time (Goetz et al. 2021). The possibility of
learning about cometary bow shocks by conducting laboratory experiments
here on Earth is discussed briefly in Sect. 3.1.3.

4.3 Solar Wind Ion Cavity

From May to December 2015, that is to say, several months before and
after perihelion, Rosetta was in a region which was mostly free from
solar wind ions – the solar wind ion cavity (Nilsson et al. 2017; Behar
et al. 2017). Mass loading of the solar wind leads to magnetic pileup
(see Sect. 4.4) and the increased field causes deflection of solar wind
ions. On large scales and for a low-to-medium outgassing activity, we
have reviewed in Sect. 2.3.1 the theoretical and observational
understanding of the ion dynamics within the coma. What happens closer
to the nucleus, or similarly when the comet draws closer to the Sun?
Still considering the electric field as mostly characterised by its
motional component, we can further characterise the local ion dynamics,
given the ion densities and the magnetic field strength. Using simple
analytical models for these, a semi-analytical model of the global
dynamics of solar wind protons for a given heliocentric distance can be
derived (Behar et al. 2018a), and results in the trajectories shown in
Fig. 37. The trajectories shown are monoenergetic test particles moving
in a magnetic field proportional to r−2. Other magnetic field models are
discussed in Sect. 4.4. We find a solar wind deflected in the direction
opposite to the upstream electric field, as previously discussed in
Sect. 2.3.1, resulting in an asymmetrical flow.

One of the main aspects of this model is the resulting inner-region in
which solar ions cannot penetrate: the solar wind ion cavity. Previous
cometary missions did observe a region free of solar wind ions, for more
active comets, close to the Sun. At 67P, Rosetta observations showed
increasingly deflected solar wind ions, and when the deflection reached
values of 90◦ and more, they were observed more scarcely, with lower
densities. They finally disappeared from the observations, to reappear
after perihelion (Behar et al. 2017), a result seen in Fig. 11 of Sect.
2.3.1, first and second upper rows. Close to the ion cavity, protons
were observed with very large deflections, before disappearing from the
data.

The deflection angle estimated by the model could be compared to
observed deflections, on the time scale of the mission, or of one of the
two excursions, namely the night-side excursion (Behar et al. 2018a).
These successfully estimated deflection angles within an extended region
of the coma validate the way the solar wind gyrates within the coma,
being repelled from the inner-most region – the ion cavity – through
this global kinetic interaction.

With a more careful look and during the time the probe was within the
solar wind ion cavity, some protons were observed during the dayside
excursion, which brought the spacecraft to the very boundary of the
solar wind ion cavity at 800 km, simultaneously with the interaction
between the coma and a CME (Edberg et al. 2016a).

Simon Wedlund et al. (2019b) posed the question of whether charge
exchange between solar wind ions and cometary neutrals could be
responsible for the decrease in solar wind ion flux that is observed
when the spacecraft enters the solar wind ion cavity.

The solar wind ion cavity and the diamagnetic cavity are two different
structures, with different spatial scales, involving very different
physics. While the ions are deflected and diverted from the solar wind
cavity, electrons keep advecting the magnetic field deeper within the
ion cavity (Deca et al. 2017). As a result, the diamagnetic cavity is
entirely independent and almost always within the ion cavity.

While the solar wind ions are excluded from the solar wind ion cavity,
the solar wind magnetic field and pick up ions created upstream permeate
the region downstream of the solar wind ion cavity boundary until the
diamagnetic cavity boundary. Williamson et al. (2020) looked at the
momentum flux continuity and plasma pressure balance over the Rosetta
mission. They found the pressure on both sides of the solar wind ion
cavity boundary to be approximately equal, as can be expected. The pick
up ion momentum flux inside the solar wind ion cavity contributes the
anti-sunward momentum flux of the solar wind outside. Essentially the
pick up ions replace the solar wind ions. A further aspect of this was
reported by Nilsson et al. (2020) who noted that the pick up ions just
outside the boundary as well as inside the solar wind ion cavity were
deflected in a similar manner to the solar wind. The pick up ions were
moving against the inferred solar wind electric field direction. This is
consistent with these ions carrying the momentum into the solar wind ion
cavity and providing momentum to newborn ions inside the cavity. The
description of the deflected solar wind in Sect. 2.3.1 holds here as
well, with the pick up ions gyrating around the common centre of mass of
the pick up ions and the locally born cold ions. The solar wind ion
cavity boundary is thus not a significant boundary in terms of energy
and momentum flux from the solar wind to the inner part of the coma.

4.4 Magnetic Field Structure and Tail

The interaction of the IMF carried by the solar wind and an outgassing
comet leads to the formation of an induced magnetosphere through mass
loading. The neutral gas coming from the cometary nucleus gets ionized
and picked up by the IMF. This mass loading of the solar wind will slow
it down and a simple 1D MHD model, presented by Biermann et al. (1967)

65 Page 78 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 38 Radial magnetic field profile for the two models as applied to
comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. From Goetz et al. (2017), Fig. 1

and Flammer and Mendis (1991), can give an analytic solution of the
solar wind velocity by combining the continuity, momentum and energy
equations (see also Goetz et al. 2017):

where and are the undisturbed solar wind density and velocity, f is the
number of degrees of freedom of the ions, and M(x) is the mass source
which is given by:

(22) 

which is the integrated column density from the Haser (1957) model, with
Q the outgassing rate, the cometary ion mass and the outflow velocity of
the neutrals and is the photoionisation frequency. The source is
expected to emit radially symmetrically, and thus a fall off of the
neutral density. The magnetic field is then simply given by:

with the magnetic field of the solar wind. This description has a
problem for the location where becomes complex and the magnetic field
and the bow shock is created (see Sect. 4.2). A solution to the problem
of the flow behind the shock was given by Galeev et al. (1985), when one
assumes there is cooling of the plasma through charge exchange at a rate
of (for details, see also Goetz et al. 2017). This then results in a
finite magnetic field behind the shock, as shown in Fig. 38.

With this 1D model one can get the magnetic field magnitude in the
cometosheath along the Sun-comet line, but it does not describe the
2D/3D structure of the induced magnetosphere. The model needs to be
adapted in that the mass loading source falls off radially away

Fig. 39 Two-dimensional histograms of the cone angle of the magnetic
field along the Rosetta orbit for the outbound (left) and inbound
(right) leg. The green lines show the aberrated Parker spiral angles.
From Volwerk et al. (2019), reproduced with permission ©ESO

from this line. This means that the mass loading further away is less,
and thus the braking of the solar wind and IMF will be less. Thereby,
the magnetic field will be draped around the active nucleus, as
described by Alfvén (1957).

In order to describe the actual situation at a comet, the dynamics of
the IMF need to be incorporated. The IMF is usually split-up into four
or six sectors, in which the radial component of the magnetic field
changes sign. Thereby, differently directed magnetic field will be
draped around the active nucleus. Depending on flow velocity of the
magnetoplasma and the diffusion time of the magnetic field through the
plasma, there can then be a layering of these field lines in front of
the nucleus, creating “nested draping.” This was first observed during
the flybys of comet 1P/Halley by VEGA 1 (Riedler et al. 1986) and Giotto
(Raeder et al. 1987). Indeed, for the Giotto flyby, Raeder et al. (1987)
were able to find the corresponding regions during ingress and egress,
showing the actual “onion layers” of the draped magnetic field.

The flybys of comet 1P/Halley took less than 30 minutes, and thus the
magnetic picture that was obtained of the upstream region was a
snapshot. This was quite different for the dayside excursion of the
Rosetta spacecraft at comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. In this case the
spacecraft took an upstream excursion of 20 days up to a distance of
1500 km from the nucleus. Volwerk et al. (2019) determined the cone
angle of the magnetic field during the excursion, shown in Fig. 39 as a
function of distance from the nucleus. In the case of nested draping,
the cone angle, defined as:

(24) 

where is purely sunward directed field and purely anti-sunward. In Fig.
39 it is clear that the cone angle switches between small values, below
the abberated Parker spiral (Parker 1958) (green lines), to large values
above the abberated Parker spiral. Through the motion of the comet an
abberation of is created. So, indeed, during the outbound leg there are
three regions of differently directed magnetic field. On the inbound leg
there is a change in direction at km, which demarks a region that did
not exist at that location during the inbound leg. This means that the
draping moves faster towards the nucleus than the spacecraft is moving.
This is called “dynamic draping.”

65 Page 80 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

This means that the upstream structure of the magnetic field looks
slightly different depending on the velocity of the spacecraft, the
static picture that is obtained from a fast flyby is put into
perspective by the slow upstream excursion.

Closer to the active nucleus there is another draping effect that needs
to be taken into account. Koenders et al. (2016a) showed that the
draping of the magnetic field close to the comet at intermediate gas
production rates was mainly in the anti-direction of the solar wind
convective electric field. This is caused by Newton’s second law; the
newly created ions are accelerated in the direction of the convective
electric field, and as a reaction the solar wind ions will move in the
opposite direction (see also Broiles et al. 2015), dragging along the
frozen in magnetic field. This was observed on 28 March 2015 (see
Koenders et al. 2016a, Fig. 2) when Rosetta had a closest approach of 15
km. Naturally, this effect starts to become very important when the
pick-up density starts to become similar to the solar wind density.

Following the mass-loaded field lines further downstream the cometary
ion tail is reached, where the field lines stretch behind the comet,
creating a double lobed (induced) magnetotail as described by Alfvén
(1957). The first evidence for this magnetotail structure was given by
the ICE spacecraft, on 11 September 1985, when it crossed the tail of
comet 21P/Giacobini-Zinner at distance of km (Smith et al. 1986).

Slavin et al. (1986, Fig. 1) showed the magnetic field super-imposed on
a ground-base image of the comet in a band around the 7025 Å line.
Before the bow shock crossing there are small variations in the magnetic
field vectors, pointing sunward, with a strength varying up to 10 nT.
After the bow shock is crossed, the magnetic field is much stronger and
pointing anti-sunward, decreasing in strength as ICE moves towards .
Near km, the field is very weak, and then turns sunward again, and
increases in strength. The field decreases in strength again towards the
bow shock and after exiting the field is first anti-sunward and then
returns sunward again like before the encounter. This encounter clearly
showed the double lobed draped magnetic field of the induced
magnetotail.

The second investigation of the tail region of a comet was performed by
Rosetta at comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. In this case the spacecraft
moved up to 1000 km down tail of the nucleus in the period from 24 March
until 10 April 2016 and only the very near-region was studied (Volwerk
et al. 2018). In order to study the draping of the field, the cone-angle
was calculated. Volwerk et al. (2018) showed that the peak in the cone
angle is between 60° and 80°, which means that the “draped” magnetic
field is more cross tail than along the Sun-comet-line as one would
expect.

The explanation for the “cross-tail” direction of the magnetic field can
be found in the deflected solar wind magnetic field (Koenders et
al. 2016a) as discussed above. The observations in the tail show that
this deflected field is transported to the downstream side of the comet,
and then eventually stretches out to the more regular tail structure.

Around apoapsis, for km, the clock angle, defined as:

showed unexpected behaviour. In Fig. 6 of Volwerk et al. (2018) the
unwrapped clock angle is presented, and it shows a continuously
increasing angle . Even when the spacecraft turns around at apoapsis
increases, which means that RPC-MAG is measuring a traveling rotational
wave along the magnetic field. Using the frequency of the wave and the
velocity of Rosetta outbound ( , m/s) and inbound ( , m/s), a phase
velocity of the wave was found of m/s. This behaviour of the clock angle

is not present in the solar wind, and thus must be from cometary origin.
However, with an average magnetic field of Bm ≈ 10 nT, this velocity
does not correspond to the Alfvén velocity, nor does the gyro frequency
correspond to that of any major species.

4.5 Collisionopauses

A collisionopause is a boundary in the comet-solar wind interaction
region where collisions first become important inside of the boundary
(Mendis et al. 1986; Cravens 1989, 1991). Cravens (1991) outlined
various types of collisionopause for both ions and electrons depending
on the collision processes involved. To date, three boundaries have been
observed by spacecraft at comets that have been proposed to be
collisionopause boundaries: the cometopause (Gringauz et al. 1986b;
Gombosi 1987; Coates 1997), the cometary ion collisionopause (Mandt et
al. 2016, 2019), and the electron exobase (Henri et al. 2017). Two of
the three boundaries are illustrated in Fig. 34. The electron exobase is
observed in the region near the boundary of the diamagnetic cavity (Fig.
44).

Since a collisionopause is the location where collisions between plasma
and neutrals dominate the plasma dynamics (Mendis et al. 1986), this
boundary is similar to an exobase of an atmosphere, or the boundary used
in aeronomy where collisions dominate the dynamic of the gas. Therefore,
we can estimate the location of a collisionopause in a similar manner to
how the exobase location is determined. An exobase is located where the
ratio of the mean free path to the scale height, is equal to one. In the
case of a collisionopause, the plasma mean free path, λ, is estimated as

where nn is the local neutral density and σc is the momentum transfer
cross-section of the relevant collision. According to Edberg et
al. (2015) the plasma scale height at 67P observed between August 2014
and February 2015 was equal to the distance from the comet, r. More
generally, Beth et al. (2019) showed that the plasma density
asymptotically follows ∼ 1/r, and therefore the scale height is ∼ r.
Assuming that this scale height is effective for the duration of the
Rosetta mission during which the outgassing rate was high enough to form
collisionopause boundaries, we can estimate the location of a
collisionopause as the point where the distance from the comet is equal
to the plasma mean free path. Taking into account that nn ∝ r2, we can
derive the mean free path to be

where rs/c and ns/c are the spacecraft cometocentric distance, and the
locally measured neutral density. This expression is equal to Eq. (29),
if the relevant cross-section is that of electron-neutral collisions.

There are several sources of uncertainty when attempting to predict the
location of a collisionopause, the greatest of which is the momentum
transfer cross-section. These crosssections depend on the composition of
the ions and neutrals as well as the energy of the ions and electrons
(Johnson et al. 2008), and are in general poorly understood (Mandt et
al. 2019). When evaluating spacecraft flybys of comets, Itikawa and
Mason (2005) assumed that the electron-neutral momentum transfer
cross-section was ∼ 5 × 10−16 cm2 for 5 eV electrons, while Mendis et
al. (1986) estimated the ion-neutral cross-section to be between 2 ×
10−15 cm2 for solar wind protons and 8 × 10−15 cm2 for mass loaded solar
wind with a bulk composition of H2O+. Mandt et al. (2019) conducted a
review of cross sections for

reactions between water ions and water neutrals and showed that the
energy-dependence of these cross sections means that the energy of the
mass loaded solar wind ion flow determines the location of a cometary
ion collisionopause boundary. However, based on the detailed analysis of
solar wind ion cross sections by Simon Wedlund et al. (2019), the
assumption of cross sections for the solar wind and cometary neutrals of
∼ 2 × 10−15 cm2 for solar wind protons is reasonable.

The cometopause is described as the boundary where the ion composition
in the solar wind ion flow changes from predominantly solar wind ions
(H+, He2+) to predominantly cometary ions (O+, OH+, H2O+, H3O+, etc.)
(Gringauz et al. 1986b; Gombosi 1987; Coates 1997). Some have disputed
the existence of this boundary (Rème et al. 1994), while others suggest
that it is a permanent feature (Gringauz and Verigin 1991; Sauer et
al. 1995). The cometopause at previous comet flybys was characterized by
a decrease in electron velocity and temperature, an increase in ion
densities and deflection of ions (Rème et al. 1988; Cravens 1989). It is
thought to be the beginning of the magnetic pileup region (d’Uston et
al. 1988). The question remains whether the cometopause could be a
collisionopause from ionneutral charge transfer reactions such as H2O+
fast + H2O → H2Ofast + H2O+ as proposed by Cravens (1989). Based on the
cross section for this reaction and the production rate of 6 × 1027 s−1
measured by MIRO during the dayside excursion (Mandt et al. 2016),
Rosetta should have crossed the cometopause before crossing the cometary
ion collisionopause, which had a larger cross section. As shown in Fig.
34, the observed crossings of the cometopause for Giotto at 1P/Halley
and 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup were at a much greater distance from the
nucleus than the cometary ion collisionopause, and thus the location of
the cometopause based on spacecraft flyby observations is well outside
of the region explored by Rosetta, which agrees with ion composition
observations made during high outgassing periods (Behar et al. 2017).
Therefore, it is not likely that the cometopause is a collisionopause as
speculated previously.

The cometary ion collisionopause was first observed by Giotto at
1P/Halley (Schwenn et al. 1988; Altwegg et al. 1993) and later by Deep
Space 1 at 19P/Borrelly (Young et al. 2004), but was not identified as a
boundary until after Rosetta observations detected and characterised
this boundary at 67P (Mandt et al. 2016, 2019). Observations made by
RPC-IES between January 2015 and February 2016 showed the formation of
two regions based on ion energies: an inner and an outer region. These
regions were separated by a boundary that appeared at times to be sharp,
and at other times to be broad as illustrated in Fig. 40. The inner
region is characterised by low energy ions that appear at an energy near
the value of the spacecraft potential, which can be seen in panels (a)
and (c) of Fig. 40, while the outer region is characterised by
relatively high energy ions that RPC-ICA shows to be watergroup ions
(Nilsson et al. 2015a,b; Behar et al. 2016b). Their high energy suggests
that they are cometary ions that have been picked up in the solar wind
flow. The boundary was first detected in April 2015, when the solar wind
disappeared from the RPC-IES ions and the energy of the water group ions
began to vary between the value of the spacecraft potential and values
above 50 eV. This variability was at times related to the spacecraft
distance from the comet, but at other times may have been due to changes
in solar wind dynamic pressure based on models extrapolating
measurements made at Earth to the Rosetta location (Mandt et al. 2016).
Over time, the outer region was observed less often than the inner
region and by the end of July 2015 Rosetta remained mostly in the inner
region. The next time that Rosetta moved into the outer region was
during the dayside excursion that took place in September and October
2015, at which time the spacecraft travelled from within 300 km of the
nucleus out to 1500 km from the nucleus and then back. During the
excursion, Rosetta crossed the boundary and remained outside of the
boundary for a couple of days as shown

Fig. 40 Observations of crossings of the ion-neutral collisionopause
during the excursion to 1500 km in September and October 2015. The bar
at the top of the figure indicates whether the spacecraft was in the
inner (black) or the outer (red) region. In the outer region ions with
energies greater than 50 eV are observed (panel a). Ion energies in the
inner region are observed at the spacecraft potential (panel c), which
varied between 0 and −20 V. The boundary between the two regions appears
in some crossings to be sharp, such as on 15 October, while at other
points to be broad. The sharp boundary crossings likely appear to be
sharp because the solar wind dynamic pressure increased due to an event
such as a CIR or CME, causing the boundary to move across the spacecraft
(see Mandt et al. 2016, for details). From Mandt et al. (2019),
reproduced with permission ©ESO

Fig. 40, thus confirming that the boundary is a permanent feature rather
than a transient one. The electron densities were enhanced in the inner
region while the magnetic field magnitude was reduced. This boundary was
located well outside of the diamagnetic cavity (Goetz et al. 2016b).

It is valuable at this point to compare the Rosetta observations during
the dayside excursion with observations made at 1P/Halley,
26P/Grigg-Skjellerup, and 19P/Borelly. We illustrate in Fig. 41 total
ion or electron density, the ion velocity, and the ratio of mass 19 to
18 ions for these four mission observations. The cometary ion
collisionopause observed by Rosetta strongly resembles a drop in ion
velocity observed by Giotto at 1P/Halley (Schwenn et al. 1988) in a
region described as an ion pileup region (Balsiger et al. 1986). The
Giotto observations of the mass 19/18 ratio shown in the bottom panel of
Fig. 41 demonstrate that H3O+ became the dominant ion species in the ion
pileup region (Balsiger et al. 1986; Schwenn et al. 1988). This is
indicative of a reaction taking place in this region forming H3O+ from
H2O+. Based on the observations shown in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 40
it appears that the ions begin to pile up inside of the point where we
identify the cometary ion collisionopause with the shaded region. Inside
of this, panel (a) shows that the ion densities decrease well inside of
this boundary, possibly indicating the electron exobase, or the electron
cooling boundary, where ion loss rates due to electron recombination
will increase as a result of electron cooling.

65 Page 84 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 41 Comparison of plasma observations as a function of the distance
from the nucleus scaled by the production rate as observed by Rosetta
during the dayside excursion, Giotto during flybys of 1P/Halley (Altwegg
et al. 1993) and 26P/Grigg-Skjellerup (Goldstein et al. 1994) and Deep
Space 1 during the flyby of 19P/Borrelly (Young et al. 2004). The top
panel shows the total ion number density for the flybys and the Rosetta
electron density. The centre panel illustrates the ion bulk velocity,
and the bottom panel shows the ratio of ions with mass 19 (H3O+) to ions
with mass 18 (mostly with some uncertain contribution from ). The
horizontal dashed lines in the centre panel represent the estimated bulk
velocities for RPC-IES observations of collisionopause crossings after
correcting for spacecraft charging effects. The shaded regions indicate
where Rosetta, DS1, and Giotto at 1P/Halley crossed into a similar range
of velocities indicating crossing of the cometary ion collisionopause.
The ion velocities at 26P/GS did not show an indication of crossing of
this boundary. From Mandt et al. (2019), reproduced with permission ©ESO

The electron exobase is the electron-neutral collisionopause (Mandt et
al. 2016). It is also referred to as the electron cooling boundary
(Eriksson et al. 2017; Henri et al. 2017), because it is the boundary
outside of which electrons are no longer collisional. As with the
cometary ion collisionopause, this boundary is not sharp but is instead
a region of gradual transition. This is complicated by the fact that
electrons may be cooled within the electron exobase, but cold electrons
are found everywhere in the plasma environment. This is because of
transport of electrons (Gilet et al. 2020). Evaluation of Rosetta
observations show that this boundary is located near the diamagnetic
cavity boundary (see Fig. 34) (Henri et al. 2017). For a more detailed
discussion see Sect. 4.6 and 2.3.5.

We described here three possible collisionopause boundaries. The
boundary closest to the nucleus would be the electron exobase, which is
located near the diamagnetic cavity that is shown in Fig. 34. This
Figure shows that observations have placed the cometary ion
collisionopause farther from the nucleus than the diamagnetic cavity and
that the cometopause is expected to be even farther away.

4.6 Diamagnetic Cavity

When Biermann et al. (1967) suggested the mechanism of mass-loading of
the solar wind at a comet (see Eq. (21)), one of the outcomes of the
model was the deceleration of the solar

wind until the velocity eventually reached zero somewhere upstream of
the comet. Although the magnetic field was not included in the early
models, it became clear that the magnetic field was tied to the solar
wind (electrons) and thus would also come to a stop. With the assumption
that a comet nucleus is not magnetised, the consequence of this would be
the formation of a field-free diamagnetic cavity around the densest part
of the cometary ion cloud around the nucleus.

The Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Experiment (AMPTE) in
1984–1986 enabled the first observations of such a region. The
experiment consisted of three spacecraft, one of which was equipped with
Barium and Lithium canisters that could be released in the magnetosheath
of Earth’s magnetosphere or in the solar wind. The expanding gas and its
impact on the plasma was then monitored by the spacecraft and
ground-based observations (Valenzuela et al. 1986; Luehr et al. 1986;
Haerendel et al. 1986; Rodgers et al. 1986). Just after the release of
the Barium canister a region of zero-field could be observed for about a
minute. This was the first evidence that addition of a gas cloud to a
plasma can expel the magnetic field entirely from a certain region.

The advent of comet 1P/Halley then brought a number of flybys of the
comet, of which ESA’s Giotto spacecraft achieved the lowest altitudes,
with a closest approach of ∼ 600 km. As predicted, this was well within
the bounds of the diamagnetic cavity and Neubauer et al. (1986) reported
on magnetic field measurements while crossing into a field-free region
at ∼ 5000 km. Just outside the diamagnetic cavity Neubauer (1987) showed
that a magnetic pile-up region similar to that at Mars or Venus exists,
with maximum field strengths around 65 nT. This measurement presented
the only detection of the diamagnetic cavity at a comet up until the new
measurements by Rosetta.

In preparation for the Rosetta mission a number of simulations were used
to constrain the diamagnetic cavity size and plasma parameters. Single
fluid MHD simulations predict the diamagnetic cavity where ion-neutral
friction equals magnetic pressure, which is at about r = 50 km, where
the plasma velocity is also very close to zero. Multi-fluid MHD
simulations show that an asymmetric outgassing profile (higher density
on sunward side) extends the cavity further out on the sunward side
(Huang et al. 2016). Furthermore, Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities of the
boundary can develop perpendicular to B (Rubin et al. 2012, 2015). The
simulations also show that the solar wind only vanishes close to the
diamagnetic cavity boundary (DCB). Hybrid simulations by Koenders et
al. (2015) can confirm many of the MHD findings, but add more
information in terms of ion dynamics. For example, they show a clear
separation of solar wind ion cavity and diamagnetic cavity. Some
accelerated cometary ions are visible even inside the diamagnetic
cavity. Similar to Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities, there are density
filaments propagating along the boundary, however, these are not visible
in the magnetic field, but that is attributable to numerical effects
(high numerical diffusion for simulation stability) (Koenders et
al. 2015). In summary, the diamagnetic cavity at comet 67P was expected
to be observable only close to perihelion (±2 months) and was rather
small with a radius of around 50 km. Due to navigational constraints of
the Rosetta spacecraft, the altitude of the spacecraft during those
months had to be raised to several hundred km (see Sect. 3.1) and thus
an in-situ detection of the diamagnetic cavity was thought to be
unlikely.

However, as reported in Goetz et al. (2016a,b) clear signatures of a
magnetic field free region could be observed at 67P by Rosetta. It
should be noted here, that the offset of the magnetometer was in the
order of a couple of nT and thus in the initial data, the field was not
observed as zero, instead the signatures were recognisable by a
conspicuous absence of all field fluctuations that are predominant in
the magnetic field around 67P close to perihelion

65 Page 86 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 42 RPC observations of the plasma from 30 July 2015. From top to
bottom: ICA heavy ions (high time resolution mode and negative
spacecraft potential in black), IES ions, IES electrons, MIP spectra,
plasma density from LAP and MIP, magnetic field, cone and clock angle of
the magnetic field. The white line on the IES electrons indicates the
summed flux over the 80–120 eV interval. The horizontal magenta bars
mark the time that Rosetta was measuring inside the diamagnetic cavity.
e1 and e2 mark the times of two density enhancements in the diamagnetic
cavity

(see Sect. 2.3.7). Assuming the field to be zero in the cavity has
served as a good way to recalibrate the instrument, but on the other
hand the exact field value in the cavity is only constrained to ±3 nT
per component (Goetz et al. 2016a). Over 700 separate events have been
reported since, between April 2015 and February 2016. This corresponds
to heliocentric distances below 2 AU (2.4 AU) inbound (outbound) and gas
production rates above 1027 s−1 (Goetz et al. 2016a; Goetz 2019).

Figure 42 shows a series of cavity signatures observed by the RPC
instruments on 30 July 2015, close to perihelion. The spacecraft was 180
km from the nucleus (rCSEQ = (0, 80, 150) km). The quick succession of
events already illustrates a peculiarity of the Rosetta measurements:
Rosetta is a slow spacecraft, so whenever the spacecraft enters the
diamagnetic cavity it is attributed to the boundary moving (not the
spacecraft). These events illustrate typical behaviour of the plasma.
The plasma outside is characterised by a series of asymmetric, steepened
waves which are visible in the magnetic field, as well as in the MIP
plasma density and the ICA heavy ion energy spectra (Stenberg Wieser et
al. 2017; Hajra et al. 2018b). The signature of these steepened waves is
mirrored in the magnetic field at the boundary of the diamagnetic cavity
where the decrease is always less steep than the increase when Rosetta
leaves the cavity (Goetz et al. 2016a). The magnetic field is oriented
mostly along the x-axis (cone angle φ = 90◦) whereas the clock angle θ
varies more frequently. The magnetic field direction can flip when
traversing a cavity (Goetz et al. 2016b). This is in accordance with the
nested draping shown in Sect. 4.4. The IES ion measurements in this
interval do not show much variation due to inopportune pointing. The
electron spectra show

little variation, except for a dropout in electrons of energies between
to . Even with poor temporal resolution this decrease is visible in the
summed electron flux. Nemeth et al. (2016) and Madanian et al. (2017)
speculated that this signature was due to the inability of field-aligned
electrons to penetrate the diamagnetic cavity boundary. Madanian et
al. (2020) calculated electron pitch angle distributions and found that
the electrons in this energy range become increasingly field aligned as
they enter the DCB. Inside the cavity, the unmagnetised plasma density
has been shown to scale very well with the neutral density (Henri et
al. 2017). The typical plasma density observed along Rosetta’s
trajectory close to perihelion is , about a factor 1.5–2 higher outside
the cavity (Hajra et al. 2018b).

The absence of the magnetic field also influences the wave environment,
for example Gunell et al. (2017a) found ion-acoustic waves near the DCB
and speculated that a current close to the boundary would be necessary
to generate the waves. Other ion-acoustic waves are thought to be
transmitted Lower hybrid waves (Madsen et al. 2018). For more details,
see Sect. 2.3.7.

Although the unmagnetised plasma is observed to be quiet within the
diamagnetic cavity (Henri et al. 2017), isolated events of dense plasma
are sporadically observed. Two such events are marked e1 and e2 in Fig.
42. Hajra et al. (2018a) found that theses plasma enhancements are not
associated to neutral gas density fluctuations, but that both their
structure and density are instead very similar to the steepened wave
structures outside the diamagnetic cavity. They conclude that these
blobs of plasma originate outside the cavity and are probably
transmitted through the DCB. The scale length is 100-800 km, thus larger
than the cavity itself, indicating it should be a global enhancement of
the plasma density within the diamagnetic cavity (Hajra et al. 2018a).

These plasma enhancements are also visible in the ion spectra as higher
energy and fluxes (Masunaga et al. 2019). Their properties are similar
to the ion energy enhancements associated with the steepened waves,
although they occur a factor of 10 less inside the cavity. They occur
more frequently at lower gas production rates. The ion velocity is
tailward and slightly radial. This affirms that the plasma can probably
penetrate the DCB.

The shape and size of the diamagnetic cavity at 67P are hard to
constrain, because only one point of measurement exists and in order to
detect the diamagnetic cavity, the boundary needs to move and cannot be
in a stationary state. Thus, models are needed to provide context.
Historically, the problem of diamagnetic cavity formation has been
viewed as a game of pressures: the magnetic pressure outside of the
cavity needs to be balanced by another pressure on the inside. For the
AMPTE artificial comet, it was determined that the gas pressure of the
electrons in the added plasma was enough to balance the upstream
magnetic pressure (Luehr et al. 1988). However, with the measurements by
Giotto, it became clear that the situation there was somewhat different.
Neither the electron pressure nor the ion dynamic pressure changed
significantly at the diamagnetic cavity boundary (Cravens 1986). Thus a
new mechanism had to be found to explain why the magnetic field was
unable to diffuse into the diamagnetic cavity. Cravens (1987) presented
a model in which the ion-neutral drag was proposed as that mechanism:

Several assumptions were made: first, photochemical equilibrium was
assumed and second, the ion velocity was set to zero in the integration
region. These assumptions are thought to be valid at comet 1P/Halley
where large neutral densities due to the high gas production

Fig. 43 Left: Occurrence of cavity measurements over the
spacecraft-comet distance in electron collision lengths. Right:
spacecraft-comet distance over gas production rate (derived from in-situ
measurements and a Haser model). The colour scale gives the dwell time
of the spacecraft over the entire Rosetta comet phase, and the blue
points mark the points at which a cavity was detected

rate imply that the ions are efficiently coupled to the neutrals and do
not move far between being created and annihilated by recombination.
With this model the magnetic field in the boundary region could be
calculated dependent on r and matched reasonably well with the measured
profile. The diamagnetic cavity size was predicted to be 4400 km, which
also fit well with the measurements.

The sheer number of diamagnetic cavity crossings at 67P is useful to
constrain the dependence of the diamagnetic cavity size and shape,
depending on a variety of parameters. Goetz et al. (2016a) found that
the size increases with gas production rate and, similar to simulations
as well as observations at 1P/Halley, that the boundary is highly
unstable. An instability is necessary to explain the quick succession of
events as shown in Fig. 42 as well as the magnetic field orientation
outside of the diamagnetic cavity. An elliptical shape with overlaying
boundary oscillation fits the boundary normal distribution. All in all,
the size of the diamagnetic cavity was much larger than expected, up to
400 km instead of just 50 km according to simulations and the models
based on ion-neutral friction.

Henri et al. (2017) examined the plasma density inside the DCB in more
detail and found that the size of the diamagnetic cavity scales very
well with the electron exobase (or electron collisionopause), meaning
that more cavities are detected when the spacecraft is close to the
region where the electrons are more efficiently coupled to the neutrals
(see also Sect. 2.3.2 and Fig. 43). The distance of Rosetta can be
defined in terms of electron collision length scales:

It is therefore possible that the mechanism that keeps the magnetic
field at bay is related to the electron neutral collisions. As a way to
explain the quiet and uniform plasma inside the diamagnetic cavity they
also suggested that an instability such as a Rayleigh-Taylor instability
could move the boundary quite rapidly. A four-fluid Hall MHD simulation
shows that the introduction of the Hall term induces an asymmetry in the
diamagnetic cavity size perpendicular to the upstream magnetic field and
finds small regions of low magnetic field that are detached from the
diamagnetic cavity that are possibly caused by reconnection (Huang et
al. 2018). These regions could also be interpreted as protrusions from a
global structure, similar to instabilities.

Modelling the diamagnetic cavity size at 67P based on the ion-neutral
friction model gave satisfactory results if the maximum field in the
pile-up region is chosen such that the observations fit the model
(Nemeth et al. 2016; Timar et al. 2017; Madanian et al. 2017;

Nemeth 2020). This is unexpected, because this model (first derived by
Cravens 1987) makes assumptions that do not apply at comet 67P:
According to Beth et al. (2019) photochemical equilibrium does not hold
in the coma at 67P, because transport is also important for the ion
processes close to the cavity (see also Sect. 2.2.4). This can be shown
by comparing the observed ion and neutral gas velocities. If the ion
velocity is larger than the neutral velocity, this means that the ions
have been accelerated and transport plays a role, and the ion-neutral
collisions cannot sufficiently cool the ions. Unfortunately, reliable
observations of slow ions are difficult with Rosetta, because of an
often negative spacecraft potential (Odelstad et al. 2015; Bergman et
al. 2020). Nonetheless, Odelstad et al. (2018) and Vigren et al. (2017)
used independent methods to find that the ion velocity close to the
diamagnetic cavity is 2–4 km/s with values on the lower edge of that
range inside the diamagnetic cavity. As for the density, the ion
velocity has a much higher variability outside of the cavity and
decreases with cometocentric distance. From wake effects it can also be
deduced that the bulk plasma flow is radial and supersonic. An ion
velocity higher than the neutral velocity is in direct contradiction
with the assumption that ions and neutrals are collisionally coupled and
thus in direct contradiction with the model suggested by Cravens (1987).
Vigren and Eriksson (2017) showed that such a discrepancy can be
explained by low collision rates due to low neutral gas densities and
propose that an ambipolar electric field (see also Sect. 4.1) can
accelerate ions to the observed velocities. Fuselier et al. (2016) also
pointed out that the unexpected H2O+/H3O+ ratio can be explained by an
ambipolar field inside the diamagnetic cavity. It should also be noted
that the definition of the collisionopause as a sharp boundary that
separates a region where neutrals and ions are coupled from a region
where they are not coupled is inappropriate, since collisions are a
process that occurs on length scales comparable with the diamagnetic
cavity size (Vigren and Eriksson 2019). As of now, it is unclear which
process is responsible for deterring the magnetic field from diffusing
into the diamagnetic cavity.

The inner coma is often dominated by warm electrons from
photoionisation, but inside the diamagnetic cavity a second, colder (<
0.1 eV) population is found (Gilet et al. 2017; Odelstad et al. 2018;
Engelhardt et al. 2018a). The cold electrons occur more frequently near
the electron exobase and where the neutral gas is densest (e.g. due to
asymmetric outgassing). The same ambipolar field that accelerates the
ions retards the electrons and couples them more efficiently to the
neutral gas via collisions. However, the appearance of cold electrons is
also related to the direction of the convective electric field outside
the diamagnetic cavity (Edberg et al. 2019a). The cold electrons are
preferentially detected in the −Econv hemisphere, the same applies for
the diamagnetic cavity (see also Sect. 2.3.2).

Figure 44 is an attempt at summarising the shape of and magnetic field
and electron environment at the diamagnetic cavity. Although Rosetta
observations of the diamagnetic cavity have added greatly to our
understanding of the innermost coma, many open questions remain: What is
the pressure balance at the boundary and what part does the changing
plasma environment play in the movement of the DCB? How are electrons
and ions cooled and/or accelerated in and near the cavity? What is the
origin of the asymmetry in the in- and outbound crossing of the
boundary? How are plasma enhancements transmitted trough the boundary
and inside the diamagnetic cavity? Addressing these questions probably
requires a multi-point measurement of the diamagnetic cavity, its
boundary and upstream plasma conditions (Goetz et al. 2021).

65 Page 90 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

Fig. 44 Sketch of the diamagnetic cavity at comet 67P. The magnetic
field (green) is draped around the cavity and solar wind electrons (sw
e−) are moving along the field lines. Rosetta is located at the
terminator, the most common configuration during the mission. Ion
velocities are indicated in dark purple, with the accelerated ions
outside the cavity moving anti-sunward and the newborn ions moving
radially outward. The ambipolar electric field (white) is confined to
the cavity. The cold (blue) and warm (red) ion populations are indicated
as well. The light red background indicates the presence of warm
electrons in the entire inner coma. The ion-neutral collisionopause is
shown in black dashed lines

5 Conclusions and Outlook

5.1 Conclusions

The plasma environment of comet 67P represents a new frontier in
cometary plasma science. Due to the smaller outgassing rate compared to
previously visited comets and the long mission duration, the Rosetta
mission covered a new area in parameter space. At the comet, there are
two plasma sources: the solar wind (mostly protons and electrons) and
the cometary plasma, made up of heavy ions (mostly water) and electrons.
Their densities mainly depend on heliocentric distance, though they are
sometimes influenced by transient events, such as CIRs or cometary
outbursts. The presence of these ions and electrons in the plasma stems
from an equilibrium between sources (ionisation) and losses. The major
net ionisation mechanisms are electron impact ionisation and
photo-ionisation, with their relative importance changing over the two
years covered by the Rosetta mission close to the nucleus. At larger
cometocentric distances usually not explored by Rosetta, charge-exchange
mechanisms are expected to play a prime role. The major plasma loss
processes are transport and dissociative electron-ion recombination.
Contrary to other cometary environments which are denser in their
closest approach to the Sun, the outward transport of newborn ions
remains an important process even near perihelion. FUV emissions can be
used as a diagnostic tool for the neutral composition of the coma,
electron-impact processes (including ionisation) and recombination
processes. OI 1356 Å can be used to monitor the solar wind electrons
beyond 2 AU from the Sun. Due to the large ion gyroradii compared to the
size of the plasma environment, the kinetic behaviour of ions plays an
important role for both the solar wind and cometary ions and can lead to
pronounced asymmetries in large-scale structures. Several populations of
electrons of different origin are present in the coma. Whereas solar
wind

electrons are typically warm (around 10 eV), at large heliocentric
distances (low outgassing) they are accelerated by an ambipolar electric
field in the vicinity of the nucleus and reach energies of a few tens of
eV responsible for ionisation and excitation of the cometary neutrals.
Newborn cometary electrons are also warm (around 10 eV), although some
of them undergo cooling through, most likely, collisions with cometary
neutrals. This yields a colder electron population, even at large
heliocentric distances (3–4 AU from the Sun) when the outgassing is low
and electrons were not anticipated to be coupled to neutrals.

In order to distribute momentum and energy throughout the plasma
environment, waves are excited at all activity stages, and observed in
the magnetic field, electric field, and plasma density measurements with
periods ranging from milliseconds up to tens of minutes. Transients in
the solar wind and outgassing rate influence the interaction on time
scales of hours to days.

The Rosetta mission has enabled major advances in cometary plasmas. It
was equipped with a range of plasma, field, gas, and spectral
instruments and orbited the comet for over two years. This made it
possible to study the evolution of the plasma processes as activity
increased until perihelion and decreased again afterwards. In addition,
laboratory measurements of reaction rates and emissions are integral to
delivering input for models, both analytical and numerical. While it is
impossible to recreate the large-scale structures of the cometary
plasma, laboratory experiments on smaller scales can give valuable
insight into plasma processes. Numerical models are also a powerful tool
to interpret and complement the observations. However, models and their
input need to be chosen carefully to ensure they are suitable to the
situation. Unfortunately, no model can adequately treat both large and
small scales alike.

Large-scale structures span scales above or at the gyroradius of the
cometary ions and can be used to identify distinct regions, with
different properties, in the plasma environment. A classical bow shock,
as known from earlier cometary missions, was not observed at 67P due to
trajectory constraints, but there is evidence of the existence of a bow
shock in the ion spectra. An infant bow shock, an asymmetric structure
that could be a precursor of a real bow shock, was detected. Deflection
of solar wind ions as a result of mass-loading creates a solar wind ion
cavity, a region devoid of solar wind ions that is persistent at high
gas production rates. Picked up ions continue to carry the momentum into
the solar wind ion cavity.

Large-scale electric fields include the convective, ambipolar and
polarization electric field. They affect both the ions and electrons,
and are important for instabilities and wave generation. The magnetic
field is draped around the inner coma, often in a nested field pattern
that was also observed at other comets. The draping follows the
direction of the deflected solar wind, even in the near-nucleus tail. A
diamagnetic cavity, a region devoid of any magnetic field, was observed
hundreds of times and was found to be larger than expected. The boundary
of this region is highly unstable. Cold electrons are always observed in
the cavity, while electrons from the solar wind cannot enter. The
magnetic field is close to zero in the diamagnetic cavity and magnetic
field oscillations cease. Rosetta was always outside of the electron
collisionopause, the region where electrons couple efficiently with
neutrals assuming radial transport, but it observed the ion-neutral
collisionopause on multiple occasions.

Figure 45 is an attempt to summarise and overview the different key
plasma processes described above. It shows the most important particle
trajectories, fields and phenomena for the three activity stages as
defined in the introduction (Sect. 1). Note that electric fields and
most waves were not included, because they are summarised in Figs. 35
and 18. It becomes clear that comets are exposed to a wide range of
scenarios. As they move around in the

Fig. 45 Sketch of the plasma environment at 67P at three different
activity stages as defined in Sect. 1. Note that the sketch is in a CSE
system, aligned with the magnetic and convective electric fields and
that the cross-sections are different for the three panels. While the
structures are approximately to scale with respect to each other for the
low and medium activity cases. The high activity case is not to scale
with regards to the other stages and the scale is approximately
logarithmic with respect to the radial distance to the nucleus

solar system, the plasma conditions change as well as the activity of
the comet. This gives rise to a plethora of different processes, whose
importance is changing with the changing conditions. As an example, far
from the Sun (low activity, panel a), solar wind ions and electrons
penetrate deeply into the tenuous atmosphere where they can give rise to
auroral emissions from the soft X-rays to the FUV. The intermediate case
(panel b) is characterised by the beginnings of large-scale structures
like the infant bow shock and magnetic field draping which are
asymmetric due to the gyroradius effects of the ions. Closer to the Sun
(panel c), an unstable diamagnetic cavity is formed and cold electrons
dominate close to the nucleus, near the electron exobase. The solar wind
ions are not able to penetrate the inner coma anymore and there is
evidence for a classical bow shock upstream of the solar wind ion
cavity. Comets therefore cover an extensive part of parameter space and
present an excellent laboratory to study large scale structures as well
as small scale interactions.

5.2 Open Questions

Many questions pertaining to cometary plasma environments still remain
open, we provide here a non-exhaustive list of questions directly
related to the new results from Rosetta:

- How do waves and wave-particle interactions affect the cometary
  plasma?
- What are the exact plasma distribution and ion composition (up to 50
  amu) with respect to cometocentric distance (in 3D), and how does it
  vary in time? Qualitative and global quantitative measurements have
  been made with Rosetta, but systematic quantitative in situ surveys
  need to be made to understand the detailed ion-neutral
  physico-chemistry of the coma.
- Why is there evidence for ion acceleration at 67P within the cavity
  but not at 1P/Halley?
- What is the plasma balance near perihelion around the diamagnetic
  cavity?
- What is the impact of electric field acceleration and dust charging on
  the plasma balance and vice versa?
- What is the energy distribution of electrons below the spacecraft
  potential?
- How are dissociative electron-impact emissions (e.g., OI 6300 Å and OI
  1356 Å) affected by the near nucleus coma environment near perihelion?
- How do nested draping and dynamic draping relate to each other, is a
  true pile-up of nested fields created or is this just a result of a
  snapshot flyby?
- What is the large-scale structure of the ion tail? How do the Rosetta
  near-tail and the ICE far-tail combine to one general structure?
- How do kinetic aspects of the ion dynamics around a low-to-medium
  activity comet continuously evolve towards a more fluid behaviour at
  high outgassing activity, close to the Sun?
- To what extent are the position and shape of the solar wind ion cavity
  dictated by macroscopic ion kinetic dynamics (see Fig. 37) and by loss
  of solar wind density through charge exchange?
- What is the combined effect of the polarisation and ambipolar electric
  fields?
- What is the speed of the bulk of low energy ions accelerated by the
  ambipolar electric field near the nucleus?
- How can we describe the shape and size of the bow shock, depending on
  outgassing and ionisation?
- What are the processes behind energy conversion at the bow shock and
  how can we make predictions based on outgassing and ionisation?
- Is there a force balance at the diamagnetic cavity boundary, and if so
  what forces are involved? What is the shape and stability of the
  boundary?

65 Page 94 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

• Is the cometopause a physical boundary or a gradual transition in the
composition of the cometary ions?

- Cold electrons have been observed even when the predicted electron
  collisionopause is below the surface. What is the process to cool
  newborn, warm electrons?
- What is the role of (quiet) solar wind dynamics in the inner coma
  dynamics?

These questions can be addressed by spacecraft missions (Goetz et
al. 2021), but also simulations (see Sect. 3.3) and laboratory
measurements (see Sect. 3.1.3).

5.3 Outlook

It is clear that the philosophical strive to improve our knowledge of
the physical processes in the plasma at the comet, and more generally
natural plasma over a full range of collisionality levels, requires
space missions that provide data directly from the source. Goetz et
al. (2021) outline open questions and propose mission concepts that
would be able to (partially) answer them. By far the most complete
mission profile is that of a dedicated multi-spacecraft mission to study
a comet’s plasma environment. Following a comet as it makes its way
through the solar system, while exploring simultaneously the plasma
environment at multiple points with a full suite of plasma and fields,
energetic particle, and gas and remote-sensing instruments would afford
the opportunity to answer most of the currently open questions.

A somewhat more limited mission concept is that of piggy-backing one or
more dedicated plasma spacecraft on a mission exploring the nucleus,
e.g. a sample return or lander mission. This would allow for a
separation of the nucleus centred instruments that usually prefer
smaller cometocentric distances and the plasma centred instruments that
would require larger variations in cometocentric distances. The
advantage is a reduction in mission cost, while losing some of the
multi-point capabilities that come with a full plasma mission profile.

Other, smaller experiments based on similar concepts as AMPTE,
i.e. creating ion clouds in or near Earth’s magnetosphere, could also
help understand microscopic processes like collisionality and pick up in
a large scale system. This has the advantage of close proximity to
Earth, but cannot address the questions on larger dynamics in a comet’s
plasmasphere.

A first step in this direction is ESA’s Comet Interceptor mission
(Snodgrass and Jones 2019), which will intercept a dynamically new comet
with three spacecraft sometime in the 2030s. Since this mission will be
a fast flyby with multi-point measurements of the magnetic field (though
not of the plasma), it will give a valuable snapshot of the environment
of a dynamically new object and will provide valuable clues as to the
asymmetry of structures in the plasma. However, by its nature, Comet
Interceptor will not be able to explore the evolution of the plasma
environment, and will only cover one part of the enormous parameter
space to be explored at comets. After the Giotto and Rosetta missions,
Comet Interceptor is a promising next step to pave the way of
multi-point, larger-class missions for exploring the exciting,
challenging, and enriching plasma environment around comets, which has
still so much to reveal.

Acronyms

67P Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko

ACAP As close as possible

AMPTE Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Experiment

AU Astronomical unit

CIR Corotating interaction region CME Coronal mass ejection

COSAC Cometary Sampling and Composition experiment

CSE Comet-Sun electric field frame

CSEQ Comet-centred solar equatorial coordinate system

DCB Diamagnetic cavity boundary DR Dissociative recombination

DS1 Deep Space 1 EI Electron impact ENA Energetic neutral atom ESA
European Space Agency EUV Extreme ultraviolet FUV Far ultraviolet

GIADA Grain Impact Analyser and Dust Accumulator

HR High resolution

ICE International Comet Explorer ICME Interplanetary coronal mass
ejection

IMF Interplanetary magnetic field LAICA Lyman Alpha Imaging Camera LHDI
Lower hybrid drift instability

LR Low resolution

MAVEN Mars Atmosphere & Volatile Evolution

MHD Magnetohydrodynamics

MIRO Microwave Instrument for the Rosetta Orbiter

NAVCAM Navigation camera

OSIRIS Optical, Spectrocopic and Infrared Remote Imaging System

PA Photo absorption PDS Planetary Data System

PHIDRATES Photoionization/dissociation rates

PI Photo ionisation PIC Particle in cell PIU Plasma Interface Unit

PROCYON Proximate Object Close Flyby with Optical Navigation

PSA Planetary Science Archive QDB Quantemol database

ROMAP Rosetta magnetometer and plasma monitor instrument ROSINA Rosetta
Orbiter Spectrometer for Ion and Neutral Analysis

ROSINA-COPS ROSINA-Comet Pressure Sensor

ROSINA-DFMS ROSINA-double focusing magnetic mass spectrometer

RPC Rosetta Plasma Consortium RPC-ICA RPC-Ion Composition Analyser
RPC-IES RPC-Ion and Electron Sensor RPC-LAP RPC-Langmuir probe
instrument

RPC-MAG RPC-Magnetometer

RPC-MIP RPC-Mutual Impedance Probe RPWI Radio & Plasma Wave Instrument

STR Star Tracker

SWCX Solar wind charge exchange SWI Solar wind impact ionisation

TIMED Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics

TIMED/SEE TIMED/Solar EUV Experiment

65 Page 96 of 120 C. Goetz et al.

UT Universal time UV Ultraviolet

VDF Velocity distribution function

VIRTIS Visible and InfraRed Thermal Imaging Spectrometer

WAC Wide Angle Camera

Acknowledgements Part of this work was inspired by discussions within
International Team 402: “Plasma Environment of Comet 67P after Rosetta”
at the International Space Science Institute, Bern, Switzerland. The
authors thank the entire team behind ESA’s Rosetta mission and those
that analysed the data and published the scientific results that are
reviewed here. This work was supported in part by NASA Solar System
Exploration Research Virtual Institute (SSERVI): Institute for Modeling
Plasmas, Atmosphere, and Cosmic Dust (IM-PACT), and the NASA High-End
Computing (HEC) Program through the NASA Advanced Supercomputing (NAS)
Division at Ames Research Center. J.D. gratefully acknowledges support
from NASA’s Rosetta Data Analysis Program, Grant No. 80NSSC19K1305. C.G.
is supported by an ESA Research Fellowship. K.E.M. acknowledges support
from NASA RDAP 80NSSC19K1306. Work at Umeå University was supported by
the Swedish National Space Agency, grant 108/18. The work by CSW is
supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under project N32035-N36.
A.D. is supported by the Foundation for the Advancement of Theoretical
Physics and Mathematics “BASIS”, grant 20-1-2-18-1. M.R. was funded by
the State of Bern and the Swiss National Science Foundation
(200020_182418). The work by M.G. was supported by the STFC of the UK
under grant ST/N000692/1 and by ESA under contract number
4000119035/16/ES/JD. Work at CNRS was supported by CNES.

Declarations

Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
