Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Nuclear Materials and Energy

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nme

AMMONX: A kinetic ammonia production scheme for EIRENE implementation

S. Toucharda,⁎ , J. Mougenota , C. Ronda , K. Hassounia , X. Bonninb

- a Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, LSPM, CNRS-UPR3407, 99 av.
  J.-B. Clément, 93430 Villetaneuse, France
- b ITER Organization, Route de Vinon sur Verdon, CS90 046, 13067 St
  Paul Lez Durance Cedex, France

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords: Modeling Edge-plasma Ammonia formation Tokamak

ABSTRACT

Until recently the EIRENE suite handled hydrogen chemistry (i.e. H
atoms, H2 molecules, and H2 + molecular ions and their isotopomers).
Extensions also exist for hydrocarbon chemistry, including CxHy species
(H is any hydrogen isotope), but no kinetic scheme including NHx
chemistry had been implemented. After a benchmarking of available
schemes and kinetic data, a reduced scheme including 50 reactive
processes is presented here, implying a large set of N-bearing species
(N, N2, N2 +, NHx radicals and ions). This mechanism is a part of a more
complete scheme of 130 processes also including the metastable states of
N2 and N. In a first time, this scheme has been validated by comparison
with independent experimental works. In a second time the scheme was
used in Eirene suite to model a type-case. First results confirm that
under tokamak conditions, ammonia is produced in significative amount
after N2 injection in the sub-divertor volume.

1. Introduction

High performance plasma operation in ITER will require the routine
injection of an extrinsic low atomic number impurity to provide cooling
of the divertor plasma via radiative dissipation. The two principal
candidate gases are neon and the molecular gas nitrogen N2. As reported
in recent articles of research groups working within the Eurofusion
consortium [1–3], the use of N2 as a seed impurity in tokamak devices is
subject to a nitrogen balance issue: a large fraction of the nitrogen
injected for the radiative cooling of the plasma is not recovered as N2
upon regeneration using liquid helium operated cryopumps. This was
clearly shown and confirmed in recent global gas balance experiments at
ASDEX Upgrade (AUG) and JET [1]. The most probable loss channels are the
implantation of nitrogen-containing ions into plasma-facing materials,
nitrogen containing species co-deposition and ammonia formation [3,4].
The formation of large quantities of ammonia has consequences for
several aspects of the ITER plant operation in terms of gas reprocessing
and duty cycle. It is therefore important to assess early on what
fraction of ammonia may be found in the ITER gas exhaust when N2 seeding
is used.

The design of the ITER divertor and estimates of the required fuel
throughput have relied for many years on simulations performed with the
SOLPS plasma edge modeling suite [5], a new version of which, SOLPS-ITER
[6,7], containing a more complete physics model, was launched in 2015 by
the ITER Organization. The code uses the Monte Carlo neutral kinetic
code EIRENE (www.eirene.de) as its main workhorse for solving the
transport equations related to neutral atomic and molecular species, as
well as for radicals and molecular ions. It has allowed reproducing the
main trends of H2/D2 chemistry in tokamak devices [8]. EIRENE makes use
of an optimized chemical kinetics model that describes both homogeneous
gas phase chemistry and heterogeneous surface chemistry involved in the
plasma-surface interaction (PSI). There was however no attempt to
implement a chemical model in order to describe ammonia formation at the
plasma-wall interface under tokamak edge-plasma conditions. In
particular, the recent update of the AMJUEL module used for kinetic data
source for EIRENE global model does not include an ammonia formation
scheme [9].

In the following of this paper, a global model for ammonia chemistry
will be firstly described, indicating which resources were used to build
it. In a second time a validation of the model in laboratory conditions,
close to edge plasma ones, will be proposed. Finally, first results
obtained for a test-case in SOLPS will be presented.

2. Construction of the NH3 kinetic model

2.1. Construction of the global model

To have a first approach of the N2/H2 chemistry, a first bibliographic
study of the different N2/H2 schemes already validated was

E-mail address: sylvain.touchard@lspm.cnrs.fr (S. Touchard).

⁎ Corresponding author.

Table 1Typical characteristic plasma parameters under the tokamak
divertor.

undertaken. Among them, two studies have retained our attention:

- the series of papers from the group of the Instituto de Estructura de
  la Materia, IEM-CSIC in Madrid [10–12].
- the work of Sode et al. published in 2015 [13].

Both have been done in low pressure ranges (between 1 to 10 Pa), cold
plasma electron temperature ranges (between 1 and 10 eV) and electron
densities close to those relevant to the tokamak area under the divertor
[14].

Other modelling works for plasma chemistry are also available [15–17],
but their conditions of validity are significantly far from ITER tokamak
conditions. Most of them are for example validated from experiments
conducted from 50 Pa to atmospheric pressure.

A first conclusion of this literature analysis was that building a
comprehensive database for an production scheme requires taking into
consideration the global plasma chemistry. Nevertheless, some
assumptions can be made by considering plasma conditions in the divertor
area, which are summarized in Table 1.

Thus, the following hypotheses have been put forward:

- The species to be taken into consideration in the model are H, H2, H+,
  H2+, H3+, N, N2, NH, NH2, NH3, N+, N2+, NH+, NH2+, NH3+, NH4+, N2H+.
  The contribution of short-lived radiative states in the ground state
  and metastable states as N2(A), N2(a’), N(2D) kinetics was also
  evaluated and considered when necessary.
- Considering the very low pressure, three-body collision processes were
  excluded.
- Except molecular nitrogen that is present in the feed gas, species
  containing more than 2 nitrogen atoms were not considered, which means
  that second order processes in nitrogen were not considered.

Following these assumptions, a database containing 130 reactions and 21
species was built up. This database has been implemented in the
SOLPS-ITER code suite formalism under the new acronym AMMONX and
contains the following processes:

- Ionization by collision between neutrals and electrons
- Neutrals dissociation by electron impact
- Dissociative recombination between ions and electrons
- Ion-neutral processes
- N2, N and H2 metastable-states chemistry
- Neutral/neutral chemistry.

The source of kinetic data used for these processes have been verified
and evaluated regarding explored plasma conditions. Among the most used
databases one can mention:

- the LxCat database [18], whose main references for cross-sections of
  collisional processes with electrons [19–21] are consistent with the
  values used by D. Reiter for processes involving N29
- the Anicich reviews [22,23] and Umist database [24] for ions/ neutral
  processes
- the work of Capitelli et al. [25] and NIST database [26] for neutral
  processes.

This new AMMONX database is available on the LSPM web site at the
following address: https://www.lspm.cnrs.fr/ammonx. It is also now
distributed as a standard part of the SOLPS-ITER code suite package.

2.2. Towards a reduced mechanism

As computation time in Eirene increases strongly with the number of
chemical processes, it has been useful to reduce this first mechanism to
a smaller one containing as few reactions as possible, while still
retaining the essential plasma kinetics. The process of the mechanism
reduction was conducted along the following lines

- First step: Each species involved in the chemical model should be
  involved in at least one production and one loss processes. A reduced
  scheme involving 18 chemical species must therefore include at least
  36 elementary processes. We identified for each chemical species the
  dominant production and loss processes, which end up with a first set
  of 30 chemical processes.
- Second step: the gas phase processes involving species that reacts on
  the surfaces and with characteristic times longer than the upper limit
  of the diffusion characteristic time have been disregarded. Such gas
  phase processes will be dominated by the surface processes and will
  have a little impact on the overall plasma kinetics. As a result of
  this second approximation step, almost all the processes involving
  only neutral ground state species were disregarded.
- Third step (general hypothesis): only processes with characteristic
  times comparable to the predominant production and consumption
  processes identified in Step 1 are selected. Characteristic times of
  the production and consumption process for each species are estimated
  assuming a nitrogen abundance of less than 4% (2% N2 in most cases).
  We also assumed that nitrogen containing species as well as
  hydrogen-ions (H+, H2+ and H3+) have similar densities. Due to the
  wide range of electron temperature, at least 2 or -3 production
  processes have to be considered for each species.

Finally, a reduced mechanism for use with Eirene is proposed with 42
reactions (hereafter referred to as model A). The validation of this
mechanism is proposed in the following sections. Another scheme of 53
reactions (named model B) including processes with metastable states of
and N has been also generated, but it is still under validation by
comparison with experimental results.

2.3. Necessity of considering processes occurring at the wall

Taking into account the plasmas considered in this study, the loss of
molecular ions may take place through either electron-impact or
heterogeneous dissociative recombination. In particular, due to the
pressure range of the considered plasmas, heterogeneous dissociative
recombination may be dominant in most cases, which induces a strong
coupling between neutral and charged species and thus significantly
affects the concentration of neutral that are involved in ammonia
formation. The recombination probabilities for molecular ions were
assumed to be unity in agreement with Capitelli et al. [25].

All the studies published in the literature on the chemical kinetics of
ammonia formation in plasmas suggest that ammonia formation takes place
at least partly through a heterogeneous mechanism involving neutral
radicalar species. Consequently, we have included in our model the
heterogeneous conversion reactions of neutral that result in the
formation of ammonia. This reaction set was strongly inspired by the one
proposed in Ertl’s work [27]. As the wall is supposed to be saturated
with H adsorbed atoms, (x=0-2) radicals are assumed to recombine with
adsorbed H-atom to form species by the well-known Eley–Rideal mechanism.
The probabilities of these processes, approximately , are taken from
those proposed by Carrasco et al. [12].

Table 2 Characteristics of the plasma.

3. Validation of the reduced mechanism

In order to evaluate the ability of our reduced mechanism to reproduce
and explain the formation of ammonia plasmas, we performed simulations
of the plasmas obtained under the experimental conditions reported by
Carrasco et al. [12] using a homemade quasi-homogeneous 0D model
described elsewhere [28]. The studied conditions are summed up in Table
2 and are close to those observed in the vicinity of tokamak divertors
[14].

For these conditions, the comparison of the variation of the calculated
and measured [12] ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen concentrations as
function of the nitrogen content in the feed gas are reported in Fig. 1.

This graph shows a quite good agreement between the model and the
experiment in these conditions, even if the formation of seems to be
slightly overestimated by our model for initial fractions of higher than
0.02. It is worthy to mention here that the computed values for the
electron temperature and density are 2.5 eV and 2.5 , respectively,
which is consistent with the values measured by Carrasco et al. [12]
(2.8 eV and 3.0 ).

Another result obtained in our calculations is the need to consider the
ammonia formation on the walls in our initial mechanism. Indeed, the
presence in our reduced chemical scheme of the process of dissociative
recombination of ions with electrons (reaction 1) cannot explain alone
the amounts measured experimentally, even if ions are produced in
significant amounts as reported in Fig. 2.

(reaction 1)

In fact, the simulations performed without considering the surface
processes involving neutral radicals, yield only negligible amounts of
ammonia.

Fig. 1. Evolution of the relative concentration of main by-products as a
function of initial fraction in the plasma – dots are experimental
results and lines computed ones with the 42-reactions reduced model
(model A).

Fig. 2. Computed profiles of main ions for 0.5% of in initial mixture, a
power provided in the reactor volume of , a mean pressure of and a wall
temperature of .

These first results show that the reduced scheme developed in this study
is able to yield a good estimate for the amount of ammonia produced in
the plasma. It also gives the trends of the evolution of ammonia
concentration as a function of nitrogen in the feed gas.

4. First simulations of ND3 formation in Eirene

Once our reduced mechanism was validated by the experiments available in
the literature, we implemented it in the SOLPS-ITER package and we used
it to predict the and species concentrations for an gas injection into
the ITER divertor. Tests cases are based on the test case
ITER_2588_D+He+N and they are solved with code version SOLPS-ITER
3.0.6-51 (also known as the “SOLPS-ITER 3.0.6 master”).

In order to illustrate the impact of nitrogen chemistry, we consider
four test cases:

- Test Case 1: only N and N+ species are included in the EIRENE
  chemistry, and we use the standard AMJUEL set of reactions
  (ALL-He_el.amd file), plus neutral-neutral elastic collisions,
- Test Case 2: only the molecular N2 species and its chemical reactions
  are added compared to Case 1 (ALL-He_el.amd and N2-only.amd files),
- Test Case 3: AMMONX simplified model A (without metastables) is used
  (ALL-He_el.amd and Ammonia_add.amd files),
- Test Case 4: AMMONX model B with metastables is solved (ALL-He_el.amd
  and Ammonia_add_metastables.amd files).

Compared to the standard ITER_2588_D+He+N case (available for SOLPS-ITER
users), we locate the gas puff under the divertor dome (blue line in
Fig. 3), instead of the more standard gas puffing from the top of the
machine. This situation is more representative of high-power ITER
operation where divertor detachment control will require nitrogen seed
impurities to be injected as close to the targets as possible, i.e.
using the gas manifold located at the bottom of the vacuum vessel.

For test Case 1 the injected gas is N whereas a gas is puffed for the
other cases with a flux of 3.0.10 [20] atoms.s-1. At this stage, we
consider that Eirene stand-alone cases, i.e. neutral trajectories and
chemistry, are solved by the Eirene code on a fixed plasma background.
The main D fuel is injected from the top of machine, while He is brought
through the core boundary corresponding to the fusion rate.

A simplified surface mechanism has been implemented for surface
processes which assumes that all ions are neutralized by collision with

Fig. 3. Zoom on N (test Case 1) and N2 (test Cases 2-3-4) injection zone
(blue line). (For interpretation of the references to color in this
figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)

the wall; and that NDx radicals recombining at the wall (aggregating all
surface chemistry into a simple prescription) are reemitted with the
following distribution: 10% of N2, 30% of ND, 30% of ND2 and 30% of ND3.

The N atom densities (in m−3) predicted for each test case are presented
in Fig. 4. Adding N2 reactions reduces the N diffusion: the density of N
atoms increases under the divertor whereas the density decreases above
it. The lowest N density close to the X-point is found with Case 4.

Fig. 5 shows the particle density of N2 molecules (in m−3) for test
Cases 2, 3 and 4. The AMMONX database (test Cases 3 and 4) predicts less
diffusion of N2 above the divertor. Taking into account the metastable
species, as for N, reduces the N2 diffusion above the divertor even
further.

Fig. 6 illustrates the ND3 formation for test Cases 3 and 4, in which N
and H initial amounts are close. Results clearly show ammonia formation
under the divertor, but the total amount seems too high, certainly due
to the strong wall chemistry assumption made above. Different test cases
(not shown here) where only homogeneous phase ND3 formation reactions in
the divertor volume are considered and wall chemistry is neglected yield
only negligible amounts of ammonia formation. However, the current
EIRENE wall chemistry model does not, at this time, allow us to do
anything more detailed that a fixed perspecies recombination rate. In
order to implement a more realistic wall

Fig. 4. N atoms particle density (m−3) for each case.

Fig. 5. N2 molecules particle density (m−3) in test Cases 2, 3 and 4.

Fig. 6. ND3 molecules particle density (m−3) in test Cases 3 and 4.

chemistry model, which actually predicts as opposed to impose a
recombination rate into ammonia of nitrogen radicals impinging on the
wall, modifications to EIRENE will be required, which will be the
subject of future work.

5. Conclusions

A new database named AMMONX including NHX formation processes has been
achieved based on the AMJUEL formalism, for inclusion in the SOLPS-ITER
code suite and as a stand-alone tool. Two reduced schemes of 42 and 53
processes respectively are proposed to model NH3/ND3 formation in plasma
edge conditions under the divertor and have been validated by
model/experiment comparison. We demonstrate the use of these new
nitrogen chemistry datasets in EIRENE runs on a fixed SOLPS-ITER plasma
background for typical ITER radiative divertor conditions. First
simulations clearly predict ammonia formation in significant amounts
under the divertor, however they are very sensitive to the details of
the wall chemistry model used. Further refinements of the EIRENE wall
chemistry capabilities are planned to improve the predictive power of
such simulations.

Acknowledgments

ITER is the Nuclear Facility INB no. 174. This paper explores new
directions for tritium inventory management that are not yet introduced
into the ITER technical baseline. The nuclear operator is not
constrained by the results presented here. The views and opinions
expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of the ITER
Organization.
