Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Computational Physics

www.elsevier.com/locate/jcp

Numerical solution of the electron transport equation in the upper atmosphere ✩

M. Woods a,∗, W. Sailor a, M. Holmes b

- a Department of Phenomenology and Sensor Science, Sandia National
  Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 87185, United States of America
- b Department of Mathematical Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic
  Institute, Troy, NY 12180, United States of America

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Article history: Received 9 February 2018 Received in revised form 7
September 2018 Accepted 10 September 2018 Available online 2 October
2018

Keywords: Integro-differential equation Stiff boundary value problem
Upwind difference method Electron transport Upper atmosphere

A new approach for solving the electron transport equation in the upper
atmosphere is derived. The problem is a very stiff boundary value
problem, and to obtain an accurate numerical solution, matrix
factorizations are used to decouple the fast and slow modes. A stable
finite difference method is applied to each mode. This solver is applied
to a simplified problem for which an exact solution exists using various
versions of the boundary conditions that might arise in a natural
auroral display. The numerical and exact solutions are found to agree
with each other, verifying the method.

© 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The principle cause of the aurora is charged particles from the sun
interacting with the earth’s upper atmosphere. During a solar storm, the
sun releases charged particles called the solar wind, which consists
mostly of electrons and protons. Some of these particles reach the earth
where they accelerate along the magnetic field lines which converge at
the poles. Once the particles reach sufficiently low altitudes they
scatter off atmospheric atoms and molecules. This scattering causes the
atoms and molecules to enter excited states, and they return to their
ground states via collisional quenching and fluorescence. Most of the
auroral light is due to electron impact excitations, which is why we
focus on electron transport. A more comprehensive explanation of how
this occurs can be found in Rees [1].

The electron transport problem can be modeled as an integro-differential
equation. What is challenging about the problem is the unusual way the
boundary conditions are split between the upper and lower limits of the
atmosphere, and the pronounced boundary-layer structure of the solution
due to the stiffness of the equation. Both Monte Carlo and deterministic
methods have been used, but only the latter are more relevant to our
study. The most well-known approach is due to Stamnes et al. [2]. This
method subdivides the atmosphere into layers, and in each layer the
problem is replaced by one with constant coefficients. The source term
is approximated by an exponential, and the system of equations is solved
exactly within each layer. These layers are patched together by
requiring the solution to be continuous. This method has been used

E-mail address: mcwood@sandia.gov (M. Woods).

✩ The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Sandia National
Laboratories Campus Executive Program, which is funded by the Laboratory
Directed Research and Development (LDRD) Program.

* Corresponding author.

Fig. 1. An example electron intensity solution at 1.2 eV.

Fig. 2. The same intensity on a logarithmic scale.

in Stamnes [3], Lummerzheim et al. [4], Min et al. [5], Lummerzheim and
Lilensten [6], and most recently in Lanchester and Gustavsson [7].

What has been missed in the above and other numerical methods is an
accurate accounting of the lower atmosphere. To explain, at the upper
boundary a downward electron distribution is specified. Similarly, at
some low altitude the upward electron distribution is set to zero. The
top of the upper atmosphere is simply chosen to be an altitude where the
density is relatively small and scattering effects are negligible. The
bottom of the atmosphere is more troublesome. Theoretically, the ground
(an altitude of zero) could be chosen because there are no free
electrons at ground level. However, the electron transport equation has
the property of becoming exponentially stiff at lower altitudes. This
region can be avoided by prescribing a lower boundary that is far from
ground level, but this yields a model which is not physically
meaningful. On the other hand, if a more realistic lower boundary is
used then standard numerical methods, such as collocation at Gaussian or
Lobatto points, will produce negative and oscillating solutions due to
the exponential stiffness.

Regardless of what low altitude is chosen, the solution must smoothly
approach zero as the altitude decreases. Typical auroral electron
intensities approach zero somewhere below 100 km where the exact
altitude is dependent on the strength of the solar wind. This is exactly
the region where the problem is exponentially stiff. A strong solar wind
can give electron intensities on the order of 108 e− s−1 cm−2 eV−1 sr−1
or more (see Arnoldy and Lewis [8] and Solomon et al. [9]). This means
that the numerical solution of the electron transport equation must drop
many orders of magnitude over a few dozen km. The very rapid drop in
intensity as the electrons approach the lower altitudes causes most
solvers, even those designed for stiff problems, to overshoot or
oscillate. The resulting negative intensities are physically
meaningless, and the problem is unstable in such cases. In Figs. 1 and
2, we show an example of downward streaming electron intensities for 1.2
eV electrons (the curves come from solutions to a numerical example
given in Section 5). This energy was chosen because there is a greater
abundance of low energy electrons, so the change in scale is readily
apparent. The point, however, is that the numerical solution should
approach zero as altitude decreases without overshoot or oscillation.

Fig. 3. The geometry of the electron transport problem.

For the most part, studies of the electron transport problem deemphasize
the boundary conditions. Although they may be briefly mentioned, there
is little discussion or explanation of the numerical complications they
introduce. Some do not mention the boundary conditions at all (see
Stamnes [3] for example) and some do not give enough detail to
understand what exactly they used as a boundary condition (see Porter et
al. [10] for example). In particular, almost all articles neglect to
mention the consequences of how to handle the lower boundary. Only
Mantas [11] discusses the difficulty of choosing the lower boundary and
that negative intensities lead to instabilities and meaningless
solutions. In a later article however, this same author uses an
arbitrary reflecting lower boundary condition (see Mantas and Bowhill
[12]). He forces 60% of all electrons reaching an altitude of 120 km
back upward. The claim is made that although this is not realistic, the
condition does not adversely affect the solution.

The computational algorithm developed here to solve the electron
transport equation uses a generalized Legendre polynomial approximation
for the elastic scattering integral followed by an eigenvalue
decomposition to delineate the relevant scales needed to resolve the
solution. To begin, in Section 2, the electron transport equation is
described. In Section 3 the generalized Legendre polynomial
approximation is used to reduce the electron transport equation to the
form that is solved numerically. Section 4 provides the methodology for
solving a stiff boundary value problem by adapting the work of Kreiss et
al. [13]. Finally, in Section 5, our numerical solution is compared to a
case where an exact solution is possible, showing the effectiveness of
the numerical method.

2. Mathematical model

In order to quantify electron transport, we use the electron intensity
where is electron position in Cartesian coordinates, is electron
velocity in spherical coordinates, and t is time. Electron intensity is
related to the electron distribution function, and its units are (see
Rees [1]). An equation for electron intensity can be derived from the
continuity equation (see Woods [14] for the derivation). To obtain this
equation, a few assumptions are made.

First, we consider the steady state problem. This is reasonable because
the time it takes for an electron to penetrate the atmosphere is small
compared to the time it takes for the aurora to change. The second
assumption is that the atmosphere can be modeled as horizontally
stratified. This is reasonable because the atmospheric density gradient
in the local vertical direction is much larger than in any local
horizontal direction. Finally, we assume a uniform magnetic field. For
the altitudes we are considering, the curvature of the earth’s magnetic
field has a negligible effect, so we consider it to be uniform. A
consequence of this final assumption is that the electron intensity is
invariant under rotations about the magnetic field lines. This is
because an electron travels in a helical path in a uniform magnetic
field. With these assumptions, the electron intensity becomes a function
of three variables: altitude z (which we take to be the local vertical
direction), kinetic energy E, and the cosine of the pitch angle . The
geometry is shown in Fig. 3. We see that an electron travels in a
helical path about the magnetic field lines, and once it scatters off an
atom, it travels in a different helical path (i.e., a possibly different
pitch angle and energy). The angle between the electron’s velocity
vector and the magnetic field is the pitch angle , and the angle between
the local horizontal and the magnetic field is the magnetic field in
angle . The magnetic field lines converge at the poles of the earth
which is why auroras are only seen at high and low latitudes.

If we assume the only processes are in-scattering and out-scattering,
then the electron transport equation is given by

Table 1The functions of (1) are defined.

where the species under consideration are , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,
, , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,

Equation (1) describes how the electron intensity changes with respect
to altitude. For every species, there is a chance for elastic scattering
(second term on the right-hand-side), excitation scattering (third term
on the right-hand-side), and single ionization scattering (final two
terms on the right-hand-side). We model these events as the production
of a new electron (or two new electrons in the case of single
ionization). Although it is physically the same electron (except for the
secondary electron produced in the ionization), it has a new pitch angle
if the scattering was elastic or a new kinetic energy if the scattering
was inelastic. The first term on the right-hand-side serves to remove
the electron with the pre-scattering pitch angle and kinetic energy.

The elastic scattering probability density functions (also called the
phase functions) are given by (see Rees [1])

(2) 

where is an energy dependent parameter that will be discussed in more
detail along with (2) in Section 3. The ionization probability density
functions are given by (see again Rees [1])

(3) 

and

where the normalization functions are determined from

(5) 

Fig. 4. The atomic oxygen phase function at E = 10000 eV.

There exist sophisticated models of the atmosphere, and obtaining for
all species listed above except NO can be found in Hedin [15]. The
number densities for NO can be found in Sharma et al. [16]. In addition,
numerous scatting experiments and theoretical calculations have been
performed that give the necessary cross sections. For this study, we
used Laher and Gilmore [17], Itikawa and Ichimura [18], Salvat et
al. [19], Pancheshnyi et al. [20], Morgan [21], Itikawa [22], Phelps
[23], Biagi [24], Alves [25], Itikawa [26], Ionin et al. [27], Kim et
al. [28], Hayashi [29], and Cartwright et al. [30].

Finally, the ranges for the electron kinetic energy E and pitch angle
cosines are

and the domain of equation (1) is

The boundary conditions are given by

(8) 

These conditions give the intensity entering at each end of the domain.
Both endpoints must be chosen. The top of the atmosphere can simply be
chosen to be any altitude where the atmosphere is sufficiently thin so
that scattering is negligible. We shall choose km. The bottom of the
atmosphere is more difficult. This is an altitude where there is no
upward intensity. We could simply choose the ground ( ), but this is not
a good choice due to the extreme stiffness of the problem at low
altitudes. This stiffness causes rapid oscillations and negative
intensities (which are meaningless) in the numerical solution for most
solvers unless a very large number of points are placed in the mesh. We
will soon see that the number of points becomes so large that it is
impractical. On the other hand, if is chosen too high (say 100 km), then
we will not find a true solution because we will be ignoring the physics
of how the intensity decays to zero. The approach we will take is to
choose an altitude where the electron intensity is clearly zero. Figs. 1
and 2 show that km is adequate.

3. The -M method

In order to discretize (1), the integrals should be approximated by
appropriate quadrature sums. Many quadrature techniques approximate the
integrand by a low-order polynomial or a piecewise polynomial. The
problem here is that the phase function for elastic scattering is not
well approximated by a low-order polynomial due to the fact that it
contains sharp peaks at . In Figs. 4 and 5, we show the phase function
for atomic oxygen at E=10000 eV and E=10000 eV, respectively. We see
that even at 10000 eV and E=1, the phase function is forward-peaked
enough that a low order polynomial approximation is not adequate. The
problem is much more pronounced at 100000 eV, and an inordinate number
of points would be required to approximate it with polynomials.
Fortunately, there is an idea called the -M method, originally
formulated by Wiscombe [31] for radiative transfer, that overcomes this
difficulty. The formulas used here are slightly different than the
original formulation, but the concepts are the same.

If we expand the phase function in an infinite series

(9) 

where is the mth degree Legendre polynomial and the are the phase
function moments, then it can be shown that (see Woods [14])

Fig. 5. The atomic oxygen phase function at E = 100000 eV.

and the remaining moments are found through recursion

(12) 

As mentioned earlier, the phase function is not well approximated by a
low-order polynomial due to the sharp peak at . The idea behind the -M
method is to approximate by a Dirac delta function and M Legendre
polynomials. This way, the delta function can capture the sharp peak and
the polynomials can capture the rest. Let our approximation be

(13) 

where is the “fraction” that represents the sharp peak and are the
modified moments. From this, we can find

(15) 

Putting everything together, the electron transport equation is now
given by

The power of the -M method is that M does not need to be large to
accurately approximate the elastic scattering integral. This means that
a small number of points can be used, which greatly reduces the amount
of computation.

Table 2The largest eigenvalues of (17) for some representative cases.

4. Numerical solution

Equations (16) and (8) together form a two-point linear boundary value
problem (BVP). In order to write this in standard BVP form, we must
discretize the equation in both energy and pitch angle cosine. Since
upscattering is not possible, the system can be solved as a series of
mono-energetic problems. The energy grid can then be specified between
the high energies (100000 eV for auroral studies) and low energies (for
this work, we went as low as 1 eV). The number of points used in the
energy grid depends entirely on how rapidly the cross sections change.
We found that for the higher energies, 20–30 points per decade and no
more than 50 points per decade at lower energies worked well. As we will
soon see, the BVP method we used is first order accurate, so we used a
linear interpolation for approximating and the trapezoid rule for the
energy integrals.

For the angular discretization, we simply replace the integral over
pitch angle cosine with a Gaussian quadrature sum. Following Stamnes and
Swanson [32], we use the “double-Gauss” rule where the M point Gaussian
quadrature is applied to each half of the interval (this is the same M
that appears in equation (16)). That is, the M point Gaussian rule is
applied to (-1,0) and the M point Gaussian rule is applied to (0,1).
Some authors use the double-Gauss rule because it allows one to easily
compute the upward or downward flux (integral of over each half
interval). We chose it simply because the electron intensity can be
discontinuous across . We found that M=10 was more than adequate for
this study.

When we apply the above discretizations, we find

where is the electron intensity vector, is a matrix built from the
angular discretization of the elastic scattering integral and is a
vector built from the inelastic scattering terms. The boundary
conditions (8) are straightforward to discretize. A common method for
solving this type of problem is either Gaussian or Lobatto collocation
(see Ascher et al. [33]). The idea behind these methods is to choose a
set of points in the domain (called the collocation points) and satisfy
the differential equation at those points using piecewise polynomials of
a certain degree. The difference between Gaussian and Lobatto
collocation is the choice of collocation points. These methods are
common because they are excellent for non-stiff and moderately stiff
problems and software is freely available.

However, upon inspecting (16), we see that the atmospheric number
density multiplies the entire right-hand-side, meaning that the
eigenvalues of the system will be approximately proportional to the
dominant density at every altitude. From Hedin [15], we know that at an
altitude of 0 km, the density is on the order of cm-3 and at 1000 km,
the density is on the order of cm-3. Since these densities span many
orders of magnitude, so do the eigenvalues of the system. Therefore at
the lower altitudes, equation (16) is very stiff.

The stiffness of the problem can be characterized by the largest
eigenvalues of the discretized system in (17). The largest eigenvalues
for some representative cases are shown in Table 2. We see that the
eigenvalues indeed span many orders of magnitude. Using a low order BVP
solver, it is not unreasonable to require that the product of the local
step size and largest local eigenvalue be less than 2. It is well known
that keeping this product small helps keep the error small (see Ascher
and Petzold [34]). Table 2 shows that this is not a problem for the high
altitudes. Step sizes on the order of kilometers are possible at all
energies. However, at the low altitudes this requires step sizes on the
order of centimeters for 100000 eV and microns for 10 eV. Clearly, if we
wish to accurately solve the problem without using hundreds of thousands
of points, something else must be done.

The problem under consideration qualifies as being a very stiff, or an
exponentially stiff BVP. We make a distinction between a stiff and a
very stiff BVP. For the latter, the relevant length scales change
dramatically in the boundary layer with the result that standard stiff
methods are not capable of accurately finding the solution. The fact
that the electron transport equation qualifies as being very stiff is
evident in Fig. 2. This is likely the reason why all previous numerical
attempts at solving this problem have made spurious assumptions such as
60% of all electrons reaching 120 km are reflected back upward.
Numerical methods for very stiff BVPs are not widely used or well-known.
The purpose of this section is to describe an upwind numerical method
that avoids these spurious assumptions.

4.1. Overview of the upwind method

To explain what is done in the upwind method, consider the problem

(18) 

with boundary conditions

where , , and , , . In Woods [14], it is shown how (16) can be reduced
to this form. It turns out that the eigenvalues for the electron
transport problem are real, so we will assume real eigenvalues
throughout this section. The method we will use is originally from
Kreiss et al. [13]. These authors were principally focused on proving
error estimates and did not adequately explain its implementation.
Consequently, we will here be focused on implementation.

Throughout this section, we will assume some mesh with for and

In addition, all norms used denote the infinity norm unless otherwise
specified. The notation

will be used throughout for the norm of a vector function on an interval
.

As stated in Kreiss et al. [13], a function is resolved on an interval
if

for where . The degree of smoothness p can vary with the BVP. The
importance of using a mesh that resolves the solution follows from the
error analysis for any finite difference method. For example, the local
truncation error for the trapezoidal rule is bounded by . For non-stiff
BVPs, can be made small enough so that this error is small. However, for
a stiff BVP the derivatives of the solution can be very large so that
the error is large unless if is made prohibitively small. For this
reason, a solution is only resolved if a number p of its derivatives are
bounded by a constant K that is not too large (i.e. ). Further, if is
resolved on and , then it is resolved on . This means that we only need
to worry about resolving in the neighborhood of every point .

The obvious problem with (22) is that in order to know if the mesh
resolves the solution, it appears we need to already have the solution.
It turns out that we can find a mesh that resolves the solution using
only information about the BVP coefficients and . This means that an
adequate mesh can be found before obtaining the solution.

Definition 1. Suppose a matrix function can be partitioned into the form

(23) 

where for i, j = 1, 2, 3 and . is essentially diagonally dominant on if
and are strictly diagonally dominant,

for i = 1, 3 and i = 1, 2, 3, and

for j=1,2,3. Here is the diagonal matrix containing the diagonal
elements of and .

Note that in this definition, there is no requirement that for i=1,3 and
j=1,2,3 is small. As we will shortly see, the first and last row blocks
will correspond to the stiff portion of the BVP. Also note that there is
nothing special about submatrices and . The definition is written with
those blocks being strictly diagonally dominant because the algorithm we
will use to solve the BVP will put the system in this form. Now we are
in a position to determine if a given mesh resolves the solution to our
BVP.

Theorem 1 (Kreiss et al. [13]). Consider the BVP

(26) 

where is partitioned as in (23). Let and be similarly partitioned so
that , for i = 1, 2, 3. If is essentially diagonally dominant on and
there are constants and such that

(27) 

for i = 1, 3, j = 1, 2, 3, and v = 0, 1, …, p;

for j = 1, 2, 3 and v = 0, 1, …, p; and

(29) 

then is resolved on . Here again, is the diagonal matrix containing the
diagonal elements of , , and .

Theorem 1 requires the matrix of the BVP to be essentially diagonally
dominant. This will not in general be the case. Thus, we must find a way
to transform (18) to this form. Suppose we are able to find an
invertible matrix function such that

(30) 

where and . Here, the eigenvalues of are large and negative, the
eigenvalues of are large and positive, and the eigenvalues (both
positive and negative) of are small. Using (30), Equation (18) becomes

Let . Then

where (the prime denotes a derivative with respect to x) and . With
Theorem 1 in mind, suppose that and are strictly diagonally dominant.
Now if is small, then is essentially diagonally dominant on . Hence, the
application of Theorem 1 relies on our ability to find an appropriate
matrix function .

Before we do this however, (30) and (32) are suggestive of a finite
difference method. If an initial value problem (IVP) or a terminal value
problem (TVP) have large eigenvalues, it is known that methods such as
backward Euler work very well. If either an IVP or TVP has only small
eigenvalues, then the trapezoidal rule is more accurate. With this in
mind, let us use backward Euler for the block integrating from a to b,
the trapezoidal rule for the block (integration direction does not
matter since it is a symmetric method), and backward Euler for the block
integrating from b to a. This finite difference method gives us

for n = 1, 2, …, N where is the identity matrix and . Also, we use the
shorthand and similarly for and . This notation will be used throughout
this section.

To numerically solve (18), the finite difference equations (33) and the
boundary conditions (19) are assembled into a system of equations of
size M(N+1). This is a very sparse system. To solve it, we use an
incomplete LU factorization as a preconditioner and a stabilized
biconjugate gradient method.

Finally, for stability reasons, we consider an eigenvalue small if the
product of itself and the local mesh spacing is less than 2. Otherwise,
we consider the eigenvalue to be large.

4.2. The Schur method

We now turn our attention to finding an appropriate . From (30), we see
that we need a similarity transform. One way to find is to find a series
of similarity transforms and construct from those. At any mesh point we
can find the Schur decomposition of . This is given by

(34) 

where is an orthogonal matrix and is an upper triangular matrix. This
implies that , , and are upper triangular, so the eigenvalues of are on
the diagonal of . Further, the Schur decomposition can be done in such a
way that the large negative eigenvalues are on the diagonal of , the
large positive eigenvalues are on the diagonal of , and the small
eigenvalues (both positive and negative) are on the diagonal of .

Next, we zero out the remaining off-diagonal blocks. Let

(35) 

so that we obtain

This will occur if , , and solve the Sylvester equations

Two algorithms for solving the Sylvester equation are the
Bartels–Stewart algorithm and the Hessenberg–Schur algorithm, both of
which are given in Golub et al. [35]. The Sylvester equation has a
unique solution if and only if and do not share any eigenvalues (see
Golub et al. [35]), which is guaranteed due to how we have defined the
blocks of .

As stated above, the diagonal blocks of (36) are upper triangular, but
and are not necessarily strictly diagonally dominant as required in
Theorem 1. Fortunately, it is simple to find a similarity transform to
make an upper triangular matrix strictly diagonally dominant. Let be a
diagonal matrix and be an upper triangular matrix. Then the product

(40) 

is strictly diagonally dominant if we choose and

for i = m - 1, m - 2, …, 1 and . With this in mind, let

(42) 

where and are diagonal matrices with elements set according to (40) and
(41) so that

We now have the desired block diagonal matrix with strictly diagonally
dominant matrices and . However, we still need to be small. From (34),
(36), and (43), let

Also define

for i = 1, 2, 3. Now let

(46) 

so that

Note that this last similarity transform does not change . It only has
the effect of scaling so that is small. This scaling is effective
because right-multiplying by normalizes the “column blocks” of . This
makes all elements of of moderate size. Similarly, left-multiplying by
normalizes the “row blocks” of . Certainly, other choices of may be
better in this regard, but (47) has been found to be adequate for the
electron transport problem.

Finally, we find using (34), (36), (43), and (47) that if we let

then we obtain the necessary similarity transformation for (30).

4.3. The Riccati method

The Schur method would be expensive if calculated for every mesh point
and does not guarantee a smooth . However, if we already have , then

(49) 

can be viewed as a perturbation to so long as is sufficiently small.
That is, the off-diagonal blocks should be small. If we can eliminate
the off-diagonal blocks through similarity transforms, then we can avoid
calculating the Schur decomposition of .

Let us partition so that

(50) 

Now let

(51) 

Then we obtain

(52) 

if solves the algebraic Riccati equation

Theorem 2 (Kreiss et al. [13]). Let for i, j = 1, 2. Also let where is
the zero matrix. If and are sufficiently small, then the iteration

(54) 

converges to a locally unique solution of

Theorem 2 states that under certain conditions the algebraic Riccati
equation (53) can be solved by solving a series of Sylvester equations.
We continue by letting

(56) 

Then we find that

(57) 

provided that solves the Sylvester equation

From (50), (52), and (57) we find that

(59) 

We now need to zero out the remaining off-diagonal blocks. We can let

(60) 

so that

(61) 

provided that solves the algebraic Riccati equation

(62) 

Similar to before, we can now let

(63) 

With this, we obtain

(64) 

Algorithm 1 Implementation of the upwind method.

    1: choose a preliminary mesh a = x_0 < x_1 < x_2 < \cdots < x_{N-1} < x_N = b that satisfies (29)
     2: use the Schur method to find \mathbf{V}(x_0) and \mathbf{\Lambda}(x_0) and calculate \mathbf{D}(x_0)
     3: set n = 1
     4: while x_n \neq b do
     5:
            use the Riccati method to find V(x_n) and \Lambda(x_n)
     6.
            if Riccati iteration (54) does not converge then
     7.
                replace \Delta x_n with \Delta x_n/\sqrt{2}, update x_n, and go to step 5
     8:
            else if block structure of \Lambda(x_n) and \Lambda(x_{n-1}) differs then
     9:
                use the Schur method to replace \mathbf{V}(x_{n-1}) and \mathbf{\Lambda}(x_{n-1}) with block structure forced to be the same as \mathbf{\Lambda}(x_n)
    10:
            end if
    11:
            calculate \mathbf{D}(x_n)
    12.
            check smoothness with (27) and (28)
            if not smooth enough then
    13:
                replace \Delta x_n with \Delta x_n/\sqrt{2}, update x_n, and go to step 5
    14.
    15:
    16:
            accept \Delta x_n and adjust mesh accordingly
    17:
            calculate finite difference matrices (33) and store
    18.
            replace n with n+1
    19: end while
    20: assemble finite difference matrices (33) and boundary conditions (19) into a linear system
    21: solve system to find solution \mathbf{u}_n \approx \mathbf{y}(x_n) for n = 0, 1, ..., N

if solves the Sylvester equation

Finally, we find using (49), (59), (61), and (64) that

gives the necessary similarity transformation for (30).

There are two ways that the Riccati method can fail. The first is if the
off-diagonal blocks of (49) are too large, so Theorem 2 does not apply.
To fix this, we can simply decrease until the off-diagonal blocks are
small enough. Typically, we know that is too large if too many
iterations in (54) are used. The second way the Riccati method can fail
is if the block structure of changes from to . That is, if one or more
eigenvalues of go from being small to large or vice versa, then the size
of the submatrices , , and (i.e. their dimensions , , and ) change. When
this occurs, we simply resort to the Schur method.

4.4. Implementing the numerical solution

Before stating the algorithm, a few remarks should be made. First, in
Theorem 1, we need to choose constants for i = 1, 2 and the degree of
smoothness p. For choosing , we simply need , so the choice of is
problem dependent. Regardless, the smaller is, the more points the
algorithm will use. As for p, it has been found to be sufficient to let
p = 1. This way, when the derivatives needed in Theorem 1 are
calculated, we can use a first order finite difference approximation
with only two points. The procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.

A few more remarks about Algorithm 1 are in order. First, the number of
points N+1 changes as the algorithm proceeds. Also, this algorithm
leaves open the possibility that there will be an abrupt change in mesh
spacing. That is, either or . This can give spurious results in the
numerical solution, but can be remedied by adding more points so that
the ratio . Lastly in step 9, we use the Schur method but alter how the
blocking is done. That is, instead of setting the size of the blocks
according to the size of the eigenvalues at , we set the size of the
blocks according to the size of the eigenvalues of are its diagonal
elements since it is essentially diagonally dominant.

5. Numerical example

To see how well this numerical solution performs, we need to find a
problem for which an exact solution exists. It turns out that if there
only exists one species in the atmosphere, then an exact solution is
indeed possible. Therefore, for this section we will assume all atoms
and molecules in the atmosphere are atomic oxygen. We realize that this
assumption is far from reality, but it will allow us to find an exact
representation of the solution and see how well Algorithm 1 performs.

Let us begin by rewriting (16) using the above simplification. We get

(67) 

where is the sum of all other terms in (16). We can write it this way
because only contains terms that depend on electron intensities at
higher energies, which can be assumed to be known. Let us define the
scattering depth to be

(68) 

where we have dropped the E dependency. If , then our equation becomes

(69) 

where

(71) 

Under this change of variables, the boundary conditions become

(72) 

Notice that the top of the atmosphere is at and the bottom of the
atmosphere is at . Hence, scattering depth (68) is a dimensionless
measure of how far an electron has penetrated into the atmosphere.

The full details of how to find the exact solution to (69) are given in
Woods [14]. The idea originally comes from Case and Zweifel [36]. We
have simply applied those ideas to the electron transport equation. From
Woods [14], the exact solution can be found using the boundary element
method (BEM) and is given by

(73) 

where we have dropped the hat notation and is a fundamental solution.

In order to compare the two solutions, we will use a boundary condition
given in Strickland et al. [37]. It is given by

(74) 

where

(76) 

Table 3 The relative difference between the upwind and boundary element
solution at E = 10 eV for each combination of E0 and Q .

Here, E0 is the characteristic energy and Q0 is related to the energy
flux Q by

For a typical aurora, the energy flux is between 0 and 50 erg cm−2 s−1
(see Arnoldy and Lewis [8] and Solomon et al. [9]). For this reason, we
will use Q = 20, 50 erg cm−2 s−1 for each test included here. We will
also use characteristic energies of E0 = 5000, 8000, 10000 eV for each
energy flux. For each combination of energy flux and characteristic
energy, we have computed the relative difference using the formula

where both solutions are evaluated at E = 10 eV and · 2 denotes the L2
norm. This norm was chosen because it incorporates all points in the
domain. The relative differences are reported in Table 3.

Clearly, Table 3 shows that the upwind method and the boundary element
method give close to the same solution. The relative differences are on
the order of 10−4, which means that the solutions agree with each other.
This demonstrates that the upwind method is correctly solving the single
species problem. The boundary element method solution (73) is exact, and
the only error is in the numerical evaluation of its integrals. In order
to evaluate (73), we used half-range Gaussian quadrature for the μ0
integrals (the “double-Gauss” rule mentioned earlier) with 20 points in
each half interval and the trapezoid rule for the τ0 integral using 500
points. Since Gaussian quadrature is known to be of order 2M where M is
the number of points, the dominant error is clearly in the evaluation of
the τ0 integral. However, the trapezoid rule is a second order method
and the upwind method described above is a first order method since it
uses Euler’s method. Care was taken to ensure that the integrands were
well-resolved with both the τ and μ meshes. Since the error in the
boundary element method is smaller than the upwind method, the
comparison shows that we have verified our solution.

6. Conclusion

We have demonstrated that the electron transport equation (1) is a very
stiff boundary value problem whose numerical solution cannot be found
without a stiff solver unless unrealistic assumptions are made for the
solution domain. To handle the exponential stiffness of the problem, the
algorithm derived here incorporates analytic approximations involving a
generalized Legendre polynomial approximation, along with an upwind
scheme that uses an eigenvalue decomposition to delineate the relevant
scales needed to resolve the solution. To demonstrate its effectiveness,
in the case of a single species atmosphere, the exact solution can be
written in terms of a fundamental solution, and then evaluated using a
boundary element method. We showed that the two methods agree with each
other, thereby verifying the upwind method.

One point not yet addressed is that our numerical method involved
backward Euler, which is only first-order accurate. However, the method
can be extended to arbitrarily high orders, and it is our recommendation
to do so when seeking scientific results. The way to obtain higher order
methods is shown in Brown and Lorenz [38]. Hence, we have demonstrated
that the method works for a simplified version of the electron transport
equation, and Brown and Lorenz [38] have shown that the method can be
extended to higher orders. Although we only demonstrated that the method
works for a simplified version of the problem, we believe the method can
also be used to solve the full electron transport equation (see Woods
[14]). There is not, however, an exact solution for the full
multi-species problem (otherwise there is no purpose to a numerical
method), and how to show that the upwind method gives the correct result
in this case is the subject of future work.
