Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of CO2 Utilization

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jcou

Plasma activation of CO2 in a dielectric barrier discharge: A chemical kinetic model from the microdischarge to the reactor scales

Martin Alliati, Danhua Mei, Xin Tu⁎

Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GJ, UK

ARTICLE INFO

Keywords: Dielectric barrier discharge Non-thermal plasma CO2conversion Plasma chemical kinetic modelling Reaction pathways

ABSTRACT

The conversion of CO2 into value-added chemicals or fuels has attracted
much attention over the past years. Plasma technology represents a
highly promising alternative due to its non-equilibrium nature, deemed
crucial for CO2 dissociation reactions. Gaining a deep understanding of
the reaction mechanisms involved under plasma conditions is essential to
improve the performance of such processes. Among other theoretical
calculations, plasma chemical kinetic modelling constitutes a very
suitable approach to address this challenge. In this work, a
zero-dimensional model of a dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) reactor
is applied to CO2 splitting, providing a novel approach for including
experimental parameters as discharge power and flow rate based on the
analysis of the different scales involved. The model choices is
extensively discussed as regards experimental parameters,
cross-sectional data and the chemical reactions considered. The
predictions of the model are in good agreement with existing
experimental data and therefore the model is considered valid to analyse
the CO2 splitting reaction mechanism based on its results. It is
concluded that the electron impact dissociation is the dominant process
towards CO2 conversion, which could explain the low energy efficiency
achieved since only ∼10% of the electron energy is consumed by
mechanism. The remaining energy would be lost towards vibrational
excitation not leading to CO2 dissociation in DBD reactors.

1. Introduction

Turning CO2 into a valuable feedstock by the development of new
processes for its conversion to value added chemicals or fuels
constitutes a major challenge already being addressed by scientists and
engineers all over the world. The large amounts of CO2 emitted on a
daily basis due to the burning of fossil fuels account for the
availability of this molecule. In addition, these anthropogenic CO2
emissions must be reduced due to their effect as a greenhouse gas, as
well as their negative impact in terms of global warming [1]. For these
reasons, CO2 splitting has attracted great attention over the past years
among scientists within the fields of sustainability, renewable energy
and environmental sciences [2–11].

Unfortunately, CO2 is a highly stable molecule (ΔG kJ mo °=−394 / l) and
its dissociation is strongly endothermic (ΔH kJ mo °=+280 / l) [2].
Hence, high conversions are not easy to achieve without a fairly poor
energy efficiency. Many research efforts have aimed to overcome these
difficulties, among which plasma processing is presented as a promising
alternative due to their non-equilibrium nature [12–25]. Electron impact
reactions provide unique mechanisms for CO2 dissociation that can take
place at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, this being a major
advantage of non-thermal plasma technologies in comparison with other
methods like thermal catalysis [1]. Also, turning a plasma system on and
off is relatively straightforward, which makes it the ideal complement
to the promising yet fluctuating renewable energy sources [2].

Dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) reactors have been extensively
studied for CO2 conversion, partially due to their simplicity [12–25].
These types of reactors normally operate at atmospheric pressure and
near room temperature. Moreover, they have a simple design suitable for
industrial scales and a catalyst can be easily incorporated [14,17–25].
The energy efficiency of CO2 splitting reactions in DBD reactors
(typically below 10% at atmospheric pressure [26,27]) needs further
improvement for this technology to be industrially relevant. In terms of
syngas production from CO2 reforming of methane, DBD reactors should
reach an energy efficiency of around 60% to be competitive with both
existing and emerging technologies. This target can be reduced by a
factor of 2 or 3 for direct oxidative pathways towards liquid products,
which is closer to the currently achieved energy efficiency [2].

In the quest for improving the energy efficiency, understanding the
reaction mechanisms of CO2 conversion is of major importance [2].

E-mail address: xin.tu@liverpool.ac.uk (X. Tu).

⁎ Corresponding author.

Numerical modelling seems to be the best approach for revealing the
underlying chemistry of this system. Among these simulations, plasma
kinetic modelling provides a great tool to analyse the relevance of
various processes leading to conversion. Due to the high computational
cost of fluid models, non-dimensional models have been developed and
applied to DBD reactors, yielding reasonable agreement with experimental
data in most cases [28–35].

In this study, calculations based on a zero-dimensional plasma kinetic
model of CO2 splitting in a tubular DBD reactor are performed and the
results are compared with existing experimental data [36]. Once
validated, the model is used to understand the reaction mechanisms
involved based on its results. A novel approach to the already existing
DBD reactor zero-dimensional models is presented in order to incorporate
the effect of the main experimental parameters in the CO2 conversion,
namely discharge power and flow rate. To the best of our knowledge, some
important considerations and approximations included in the model have
never been tested before. A discussion of the most suitable cross
sections datasets for the electron impact dissociation is also presented
based on results reported elsewhere [32,37]. Polak and Slovetsky’s CO2
dissociation total cross-sectional data [38] was finally selected to
calculate the CO2 electron impact dissociation rate coefficient, being
contrasted to experimental results in terms of CO2 conversion for the
first time. A reduced chemistry set reported in [31] is employed for
this model, also contributing towards a low computational cost as it
only involves 17 reactions and 9 species. A reduced electric field (E/N)
well outside the range of figures reported elsewhere for DBD reactors is
used. This might have important consequences regarding the main channels
for CO2 dissociation and the energy efficiency achieved in DBD reactors
in comparison with that of microwave (MW) discharges. Calculations were
performed by means of the ZDPlasKin Fortran module (version 2.0a, Sep
2017) [39]. BOLSIG+ solver (version 03/2016) was employed to calculate
the rate coefficients of the electron impact reactions [40]. LXCat
project databases were used for retrieving cross-sectional data [41].

2. Description of the model

2.1. Experimental setup to be modeled

According to the experiments that the model in this study intends to
represent, a co-axial DBD reactor with no packing will be considered
(see Fig. 1). In every case relevant to this work, the discharge length
is 100 mm while there is a 2.5 mm discharge gap (the inner diameter of
the quartz tube is 22 mm while the outer diameter of the inner electrode
is 17 mm). Further details on the experimental setup can be found in our
previous work [36]. Different values for the discharge power and flow
rate are considered (10 to 50 W and 25 to 125 ml/min, respectively),
corresponding to different experimental measurements. The

voltage across the gap has been calculated through Lissajous figures,
leading to a reduced electric field of 56 Td. This value will be used as
an input parameter throughout all the calculations performed in this
work. For further information on the method used to calculate E/N from
Lissajous figures, see ref [42].

2.2. Zero-dimensional DBD reactor model

Zero-dimensional models have been previously applied to plasma kinetic
modelling of DBD reactors [28-31]. The main simplification of these
models relies on neglecting any spatial variations of any property in
the radial and angular coordinates of the tubular reactor,
i.e. properties only vary along the axial coordinate of the reactor (Z).
Like in plug flow models of tubular reactors, a slice of reactor with a
differential length dZ can be considered as a differential element of
volume within which every property is homogeneous. The slice of reactor
flows through the reactor from Z = 0 to L (reactor length) with an
average velocity , considered to be homogeneous in the reactor’s flow
section for the purpose of this model (planar velocity profile). In
addition, this magnitude is assumed to be constant along the axial
coordinate since density (temperature and pressure) variations between
the reactor’s inlet and outlet are neglected. Therefore, the velocity is
essentially the ratio between the reactor length (L) and its residence
time ( ). In fact, this model become non-dimensional when the
independent variable Z is translated into the residence time ( ). Each
element of volume flowing through the reactor (Z = 0 to L) can be seen
as a small batch reactor progressing in time until reaching the
residence time of the reactor . Then, as expressed in Eq. (1), the
production or loss process will contribute to the variation of the
number density of the ith species with respect to residence time
according to the stoichiometric coefficient of the species in the
reaction and its reaction rate (rrti). See variable index in Table S3.

(1) 

Plasma discharges in DBD reactors present a filamentary regime for most
gases and it is certainly the case for [43]. Therefore, the element of
volume described above passes through a number of filaments as it flows
through the reactor, facing a high concentration of plasma electrons
which in turn generate short lived plasma species by electron impact
reactions. In terms of the non-dimensional model, these filaments, which
are spatially spread along the axial coordinate of the reactor, can be
represented as consecutive pulses over time with a certain frequency ( )
[29]. This parameter has been widely varied among the different
zero-dimensional models published in the past years, ranging from values
in the order of the actual voltage frequency (tens of kHz) [29] to
arbitrarily chosen values like 1 MHz [28] or 30 Hz [31]. Interestingly,
this frequency of pulses in the model is not strongly related to the
actual frequency of the voltage applied to the plasma

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of DBD plasma reactor.

Fig. 2. Scales and parameters in the model of a DBD reactor.

system. In fact, it can be understood in terms of the period resulting
from the ratio of the distance between two consecutive filaments and the
velocity of the fluid . That is to say, the frequency of the pulses in
the zero-dimensional model can be expressed as in Eq. (2), where is the
average velocity of the fluid inside the reactor and is the space
between two consecutive filaments (see Fig. 2). Notably, the latter
quantity brings uncertainty into the model. However, this reasoning
gives a much narrower range of reasonable values for the frequency of
pulses, within which it is just a fitting parameter.

(2) 

2.3. Effect of power in the model’s parameters - filament-to-filament scale

Mei et al. showed experimentally that the power deposited on the plasma
system affects the conversion of [36]. In the referred work, a range of
power values from 10 to 50 W was covered resulting in an increase from
17.4 to 22.4% in the conversion. Furthermore, we consider the electric
field must remain constant regardless of the power value, as the
breakdown voltage should as well (56 Td for all calculations in this
work, as measured applying the methodology in [42] to the experimental
setup of [36]). However, an increase in the power does cause a rise in
the number of filaments per unit area observed in the system, as
reported in [44]. Model wise, we propose to take this effect into
consideration to account for the rise in conversion with power.
Ultimately, a greater number of filaments implies a shorter spacing and
so a higher frequency of pulses for the same velocity of the fluid. In
other words, this implies more pulses in the same residence time and,
hence, a greater conversion.

The spacing between filaments is not known and a reference value of 1 mm
was proposed for this model based on experimental observations. Then,
this magnitude should be slightly above or below that figure for lower
or higher power deposition figures, respectively. Therefore, a
dependence between and the power has been proposed (Eq. (3)) according
to the relationship found experimentally between power and conversion
[36].

The values of and a are parameters to be found by minimising the
difference between experimental and theoretical conversion values for
every power value. In this way, and consequently constitutes the first
fitting parameter of this model, as in other zero-dimensional models
[29–31,34].

2.4. Effect of flow rate in the model’s parameter – one-filament scale

As it has been shown experimentally, the flow rate has an inverse effect
on the conversion, yielding lower conversion at higher flow rates [36].
To start with, a higher flow rate results in both a shorter residence
time ( ) and a higher frequency of pulses ( ). These effects cancel out
and the resulting number of pulses ( ) remains the same regardless of
the flow rate, as can be seen in Eq. (4), where the residence time of
the reactor can be expressed as (see Fig. 2).

(4) 

Thus, the above described effects cannot explain the drop in conversion
on its own and a closer look at a filament is needed to address the
effect of a reduction in the flow rate. In this model, the space between
filaments ( ) consists of a filament and a non-filamentary region
(interpulse), as shown in Fig. 2. In the filament, molecules experience
collisions with plasma electrons and electron impact reactions occur
giving rise to more free electrons and reactive plasma species. On the
other hand, ground state chemistry dominates in the interpulse since no
plasma electrons are present and the short lived plasma species tend to
be rapidly consumed in recombination reactions. Hence, the pulses (where
free electrons are available) are what really drives the conversion of
in our model.

Although the number of pulses remains the same for every flow rate, it
can be seen intuitively that each pulse is shorter lived at higher flow
rates. In fact, the duration of both the pulse and the interpulse
decrease at higher flow rates. However, as the number density remains
steady during the interpulse, a shorter interpulse does not have a

noticeable impact in the conversion. By contrast, a lower duration of
the pulse has a big impact in the number density variation, resulting in
a smaller overall conversion for the same number of pulses.

The time during which an element of volume sees the pulse depends on the
width of the filament and the velocity of the fluid, i.e., the flow
rate. The filament width has been reported to range from 0.1 to 0.2 mm
[43], so it should be noted that there is roughly an order of magnitude
between that figure and the space between two consecutive filaments .
Then, there is also an order of magnitude between the period between
filaments , which determines the frequency of pulses and the number of
pulses given a residence time ) and the duration of one filament , which
drives the CO2 conversion for a given number of pulses ). Besides, the
duration of a filament in the zero-dimensional model could be expressed
as .

However, the above stated expression for predicts much greater
conversion drops than those observed experimentally when increasing the
flow rate. For this reason, in this study we suggest a balancing effect
for this relation, proposing that the filament width depends on the
velocity for the reasons exposed as follows.

First, let’s consider the mechanisms that allow filaments to appear in a
DBD reactor. Filaments are actually a group of microdischarges that
occur in the same spot every time the polarity of the electrodes
changes. A microdischarge lasts for tens of nanoseconds (ns) before the
electrons reach the positive electrode and the accumulated charge makes
the local electric field collapse [43]. A filament duration of 30 ns has
been repeatedly reported in the literature [28–34]. After a polarity
reversal occurs, the deposited charge facilitates the formation of a new
microdischarge in the same spot. Although electrons dissipate in tens of
nanoseconds, it takes tens of micro seconds (µs) for slow-moving heavy
ions to reach the negative electrode, resulting in a low but
long-lasting falling ion current. Hence, both the accumulated negative
charge and the ion current characterises this region in space as a
microdischarge remnant, after a microdischarge occurred. With a
frequency of 9 kHz, a voltage polarity reversal occurs every 56 µs. The
fact that the microdischarge remnant is not fully dissipated before the
polarity changes also facilitates the formation of a new microdischarge
in the same spot. This is called memory effect and explains why it is
actually possible to see filaments in a DBD reactor. If the
microdischarges were formed on a new spot every time the polarity
changed, the discharge would appear uniform and no spatially localised
single filaments could be observed [43].

For the purpose of this model, we will analyse what impact could the
flow regime have on the memory effect. As the flow regime changes from
laminar to turbulent, velocity profiles inside the reactor tend to
become planar. This is a result of more random particle displacements
and a higher dispersion that tends to make properties homogeneous inside
a slice of reactor, including the velocity. Thus, a more turbulent flow
regime could slightly disperse the ions in the microdischarge remnant.
Also, the velocity in the proximity of the inner walls of the reactor is
higher in turbulent flow, as the velocity profile becomes planar. This
could have an impact on how electrons are deposited in the positive
electrode, enhancing dispersion as they move towards the electrode and
giving the deposited electrons a wider spread over the cathode surface.
All these dispersion effects could very slightly affect the memory
effect of the microdischarges. This effect might be very small as
filaments are indeed observed for every flow rate, but it could be
understood as a minimal step towards homogenising the discharge (which
would be the result of having no memory effect at all). Nevertheless,
this effect could suffice to slightly disperse the microdischarge
remnant and moderately widen the spot where a next microdischarge could
occur, hence resulting in an enlargement of the filament width.

Based on this hypothesis, we propose a dependence between the

filament width and the velocity of the fluid, which has an effect in the
time a molecule spends in a filamentary region (duration of the pulse in
terms of the model, ). As stated above, the duration of the pulse has a
great impact on the conversion and it is what really drives the results
for a constant number of pulses, . Therefore, Eqs. (5) and (6) are
proposed, where the values of and b are parameters to be found by
minimising the difference between experimental and theoretical
conversion figures for every flow rate value.

Hence, as long as b is positive and smaller than 1, this effect could
moderate the negative effect that a higher velocity has on the
conversion values predicted by the model. In this way, the duration of
the pulse (or the width of the filament, ) works as the second fitting
parameter of this model.

2.5. Electron density in one filament - microdischarge scale

Considering the velocity of the fluid and the width of one filament, the
time spent by a molecule inside the filament (model-wise, the duration
of the pulse ) ranges from around 15,000 to 37,000 µs. In that period of
time, around 300 to 700 microdischarges occur, as the frequency of the
applied voltage is 9 kHz and there is one microdischarge per half-cycle.
This means, there is one microdischarge every 56 µs ( ), each of them
consisting of 30 ns of an actual microdischarge (electron avalanche and
plasma channel) plus an afterglow until the next microdischarge. In our
model, this happens every time the element of volume passes through a
filament (that is times). See Fig. 2 for a comparison between the
different scales involved.

For this behaviour to be computationally represented, a time step in the
order of a fraction of a nanosecond would be needed. Then, it would
require around time-steps numerically integrated to build up to a
residence time of around tens of seconds. For this reason, the hundreds
of microdischarges taking place when the element of volume passes
through a filament will be averaged over the period of time inside that
filament . The purpose of this simplification is to obtain an average
electron density valid for the whole period inside the filament, . Then,
the number of microdischarges in one filament can be expressed as in Eq.
(7), leading to Eq. (8) for .

(7) 

(8) 

As stated above, the plasma electrons during a microdischarge are
considered to last for around 30 ns [43], peaking somewhere in that
interval and becoming zero from 30 ns onwards until the next
microdischarge (until is reached). According to the literature, the
electron density Ne can reach values around - cm-3 [43]. Thus, the
electron density in one microdischarge will be modeled as a function of
time standing at 0 cm-3 at 0 ns, promptly reaching a maximum of cm-3 at
3 ns and subsequently falling steadily to 0 cm-3 at 30 ns (Ne(t)). Then,
the right hand side of Eq. (8) would modify as in Eq. (9).

(9) 

From then on, an average electron density that is valid for the duration
of one filament in our model ( ) can be obtained as expressed in Eqs.
(10) and (11).

Table 1 Reduced reactions set. All rate constants in unless indicated
otherwise.

&lt;sup>1Rate coefficient calculated by BOLSIG + solver for a given
EEDF.

(10) 

(11) 

In this way, an average electron density of is obtained, which will be
considered constant for the duration of the pulse in our model ( , which
as it has been said, involves thousands of microdischarges). This value
will be used for all calculations over the range of power and flow rate
values covered in this study. It should be noted that this value depends
on the duration of the pulse (30 ns) and (which depends on the frequency
of the applied voltage, 9 kHz) rather than on .

To the best of our knowledge, an electron density of is a reasonable
value to base our approximation on as it is within the range of values
reported for DBD reactors . Furthermore, values in this region have been
used in several published modelling works [28–34]. However, our
calculated conversion is very sensible with respect to the electron
density. Hence, the latter is acting as a third fitting parameter of our
model, even though it is not intended to. This leads to a discussion
about what a relatively arbitrarily chosen electron density means for
the simulation. Several plasma phenomena lie under this umbrella over
which we do not have control and cannot model accurately. Moreover, even
if we could measure the electron density precisely, the only way we
could account for those phenomena is to have an average electron density
that yields good agreement with the experiments in terms of conversion.

For these reasons, we consider this approach acceptable as long as the
electron density fits within the reported values for DBD reactors. From
a maximum electron density of , the average electron density of arises.
It should be mentioned that the exact same figure has been used for all
calculations in this work.

2.6. Summary of the reactor model

For the reasons exposed above, our model consists of a number of pulses
( ) that occur every seconds. Each pulse will have a constant electron
density held for and an interpulse of around ( ) seconds with no plasma
electrons, until the element of volume reaches the next filament or
pulse (see Fig. 2). This new approach implies a very low computational
cost, which allows us to perform calculations effectively (typically in
the order of hours of computational time). Table S1 summarises the
parameters of each

calculation performed in this work.

As described above, the unknown physical aspects of a DBD discharge lead
to the three fitting parameters of this model, namely, the frequency of
pulses ( ), the duration of the pulse ( ) and the average electron
density ( ). The former is related to the spacing between filaments and
represents the effect of the discharge power in the conversion of . The
second fitting parameter represents the time spent by a molecule inside
a filament and depends on the fluid velocity or flow rate. Notably, the
ratio between and is equal to that between the plasma volume and the
total reactor volume. At this point, it should be highlighted that this
selection of fitting parameters is equivalent to that of other
zero-dimensional models [29–34]. However, the way in which these fitting
parameters are derived in our model results in a narrower range of
reasonable values for them (no more than one order of magnitude in both
cases).

Finally, the electron density is not intended as a fitting parameter,
however it should be regarded as such since the conversion predicted by
the model is very sensitive to it. Although this limits the reliability
on our model, there is no further improvement we could do at the moment.
The average electron density is calculated considering a maximum
electron density of and a microdischarge duration of 30 ns. Both values
agree with the state of the art of plasma kinetic modelling of DBD
reactors [29–35].

2.7. Chemical model

For the chemical model, a reduced set of reactions developed and
reported in [31] was employed. This reduced set consists of 9 species
(see Table S2) and 17 reactions, which implies a much lower
computational cost than the complete set (around 42 species and 500
reactions) [28,31,33]. The reactions considered, shown in Table 1,
involve 7 electron impact reactions (R1 to R7), as well as 5 reactions
among ions (R8 to R12) and 5 between neutral species (R13 to R16). As
regards conversion by electron impact reactions, the main mechanisms
identified in [28] are taken into account, i.e., electron attachment
(R1), electron impact dissociation (R2) and total ionisation (R3).
Vibrationally excited states of were not taken into account in this
model for the reasons presented in Section 2.8.

In addition, electron impact dissociation reactions were considered for
and (R4 and R5, respectively), while for the latter two electron
attachment reactions were also included in the model (R6 and R7). The
significance of these reactions for the simplified model relies
partially on the fact that they compete with decomposition reactions for
the plasma electrons, causing the conversion to flatten as the

&lt;sup>2Three-body process, rate coefficients in cm6s-1.

and O3 densities increase. Among the ionic and neutral reactions,
recombination processes of O atoms (or anions) with CO to form CO2 are
also part of the reaction set. Likewise, these reactions contribute to
flatten the conversion of CO2 at long residence times [31]. For further
details of this model and its validity, refer to [31].

2.8. Vibrationally excited states of CO2

The role of vibrationally excited states of CO2 in its dissociation and
the decision to exclude them from the chemistry set is addressed in this
section. A fluid model for CO2 dissociation reactions in a parallel DBD
reactor including an extensive description of the vibrational kinetics
can be found in [47]. Treanor et al. [48] showed that under conditions
characterised by a vibrational temperature well greater than the
translational temperature, a population inversion in the energy levels
can be achieved. Therefore, as discussed in [33,43], these largely
populated highly excited anharmonic vibrational levels are deemed
crucial for the dissociation of the CO2 molecule. In this regard, a
study of the vibrational distribution function for CO2 comparing MW and
DBD discharges (at 20 Torr and atmospheric pressure, respectively) can
be found in [33]. According to their results, the population of high
vibrational states is a result of the rates of (or the competition
between) the different processes involved, namely, electron impact
vibrational excitation (exciting CO2 molecules), vibrational-vibrational
exchange collisions (which favour highly excited states) and
vibrational-traslational relaxations (which de-excite vibrationally
excited CO2 molecules as it thermalises the gas). In addition, there are
factors that favour or impede the different mechanisms involved. For
instance, a long duration of a plasma pulse will favour vibrational
excitations as it implies availability of free energetic electrons. On
the other hand, a high pressure will contribute to the de-excitation of
CO2 molecules back to their ground state. Indeed, it is concluded that
the pressure enhances the reaction rate of vibrational-translational
(VT) transitions as collisions with ground state CO2 molecules are more
likely [33].

Interestingly, MW discharges represent a plasma duration in the order of
milliseconds (far greater than DBD in the order of nanoseconds) and are
usually performed at low pressures, which favours largely populated high
vibrational states that can certainly lead to dissociation. On the other
hand, DBD discharges are often performed at atmospheric pressure so the
vibrational-translational relaxations are orders of magnitude faster
than that in a low pressure MW discharge (in a DBD reactor,
vibrationally excited states can thermalise in a few microseconds).
Moreover, DBD microdischarges last for a very short time (in the order
of nanoseconds), which is detrimental for the electron impact
vibrational excitations. The vibrational excitation gained in a
microdischarge (lasting for nanoseconds) is then thermalised (lost)
before the next microdischarge takes place (after several microseconds).
These factors explain why long-lasting large populations of high
vibrational states are not achieved in DBD discharges, thus CO2
dissociation must proceed through other mechanisms such as electronic
excitations [33].

2.9. Plasma kinetic model – cross-sectional data

The rate coefficients for electron impact reactions were calculated by
the Boltzmann solver BOLSIG+ [40] implemented in the ZDPlasKin Fortran
module as a function of the corresponding cross sections. Crosssectional
data was retrieved from different databases within the LXCat project
[41]. It should be highlighted that the Electron Energy Distribution
Function (EEDF) was calculated based on complete and consistent
(whenever possible) sets of cross sections for each involved species.
The complete and consistent IST-Lisbon Database reported in [37] and
available in LXCat ([41]) was used for CO2 and O2 processes.
Importantly, this cross-sectional data has been validated against
measured swarm data [37]. For CO, O3 and O species, complete
cross-sectional data sets from Morgan database were adopted [46]. The
cross sections for the three body recombination R7 were also taken from
the latter database. With all this data, the EEDF was calculated and
then used to integrate the corresponding cross sections in order to
obtain the rate coefficients of the electron impact reactions included
in the model (R1 to R7). Specific references to the databases can be
found in Table 1 and a list of the collisional processes considered for
the calculation of the EEDF is included in the Supporting Information
(Table S4).

Regarding the completeness of the IST-Lisbon database for CO2 processes,
it should be noted that only one superelastic collisional process is
included, namely, de-excitation from v1 ≡ (010) to the ground level, v0.
This is the dominant de-excitation process while a second superelastic
process would be required for a better accuracy of the calculated swarm
parameters at reduced electric fields below ∼1 Td [37], which is not the
case in this study. In addition, the effect of the superelastic process
v v 1 0 → is particularly important at low electric fields but barely
noticeable above 10 Td [37], while our work considers 56 Td.

Although the superelastic collision v v 1 0 → is included in the set,
the number density of CO2(v1) will always be zero since vibrationally
excited states of CO2 were not considered in this model (see Section
2.8). Thus, this superelastic collision will never account for an energy
gain towards the EEDF. To assess the impact of this approximation, the
EEDF calculated with BOLSIG+ for the case of this study (no CO2(v1)) was
compared with that obtained for a relative CO2(v1) population of 0.076
at 300 K, according to [37]. The results indicate that EEDFs considering
superelastic collisions tend to be slightly shifted towards higher
electron energies (as these processes can effectively transfer energy
back to the electrons). Then, our approximation could result in a minor
underestimation of the electron impact rate coefficients. However, the
effect of superelastic collisions in the EEDF vanishes for reduced
electric fields beyond 10 Td and this approximation is considered
suitable for our work. A comparison of the calculated EEDFs, electron
energies and rate coefficient for both cases at different electric
fields can be found in the Supporting Information (Figures S1-S5 and
Table S4).

The rate coefficient for CO2 dissociation through electron impact
excitation deserves a special mention as this process has been reported
to be the dominant mechanism for CO2 conversion in DBD reactors [32].
Hence, the cross-sectional data employed for its calculation is a
crucial factor for the validity of the model and the results obtained.
Numerous cross section data sources are available for the CO2 electron
impact excitation and the direct association of these processes with CO2
dissociation has been extensively studied in [32] and [37]. To start
with, the IST-Lisbon dataset is based on the excitation processes
described by Phelps [49], with thresholds of 7 and 10.5 eV. These cross
sections have been extended to a wider range of electron energy as
described in [45]. However, these cross sections are likely to involve
more processes than only dissociation, as explained in [37]. Then,
assigning Phelps’s 7 and 10.5 eV cross sections to CO2 dissociation is
not straightforward and may result in an overestimation of the
dissociation rate coefficients, as proved in [32] and [37]. On the other
hand, Itikawa’s Database ([50]), also available in LXCat, has been
widely used in studies involving zero-dimensional plasma kinetic models
[28–31]. However, this dataset has been recently reported to
underestimate the CO2 dissociation reaction rate coefficients [32,37].
Besides, Polak and Slovetsky’s cross sections [38] have been reported to
satisfactorily represent CO2 dissociation. In this theoretical study,
the authors described a total dissociation cross section showing two
energy thresholds, in a similar fashion as Phelps’s 7 and 10.5 eV
datasets. Regardless of the shape, Polak’s cross sections are much
smaller in magnitude than those of Phelps, which could contribute to
compensate the overestimation reported for the latter dataset [32,37].
Among these and other excitation cross sections, Phelps’s 7 eV and
Polak’s datasets appear to be the most suitable to model CO2
dissociation, according to results in [32] and [37], respectively.

In this work, the recommendation given by the authors of the IST-Lisbon
Database was followed [37]. Therefore, Polak and Slovetsky’s
dissociation total cross-sectional data was used to calculate the
dissociation rate coefficient (R2). Nevertheless, these cross sections
were integrated over the EEDF calculated with the IST-Lisbon Database
complete and consistent set of cross sections (excluding Polak’s cross
sections).

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Validation of the model – average electron density

The averaging procedure described in Section 2.5 has been verified with
the calculation described below. A simulation of one single filament has
been performed, involving 662 microdischarges (modelled as 30 ns-long
pulses) repeated every 55.6 s ( ). Then, each microdischarges has an
afterglow of (55.6 µs - 30 ns) seconds. This corresponds to a frequency
of 9 kHz (that of the applied voltage) and covers a reaction time of
3.67 10-2 seconds, i.e. in this verification ( ). This and corresponds
to the calculations with a flow rate of 25 ml/min. The electron density
in this case was a function of time peaking at cm-3 in an interval of 30
ns, as described in Section 2.5. Then, the conversion computed by such
calculation was compared with that of a calculation consisting of an
average electron density of cm- (as found in Section 2.5) kept constant
for seconds. The results are 0.3029% and 0.3028%, respectively. The
absolute error is 0.0001% while the relative error equals 0.0003
(0.03%). Therefore, it can be concluded that this approximation is
reliable for the conditions being addressed in this paper. This involves
low temperatures and low conversion values, where the chemistry of the
system is not too complex and the contribution of reactions between
heavy particles in the afterglow is orders of magnitude smaller than
that of electron impact processes during the pulse.

The computational time saved through this approximation outweighs any
concern about the already negligible error introduced by it. The first
calculation (662 pulses) ran for 7.5 h. By contrast, it took less than a
minute to complete the averaged calculation, therefore resulting in a
time saving of more than 99%. Thus, we consider this approximation not
only reliable but also necessary within this particular framework.

3.2. Validation of the model – matching experimental data

The validity of the model is only achieved once its results are
contrasted with the experimental measurements it intends to represent.
Selectivity towards CO varies around 96–98 % for every case, making it
useless to compare the experimental measurements with the model results.
Therefore, only conversion will be used to match the experimental and
calculated values. Overall, for the model proposed in this work, the
calculated conversion figures are in very good agreement with the
experimental data, with only one measurement having a relative error
above 5%. The complete set of results including every

Fig. 3. CO2 conversion at different discharge powers and 25 ml/min.

Fig. 4. CO2 conversion at different flow rates and 50 W.

calculation is presented in Table 2. In addition, the results are shown
in Figs. 3 and 4 for variable power and flow rate figures, respectively.
Combined results in terms of SEI (specific energy input, defined as the
ratio between the power and the flow rate) are presented in Fig. 5. The
definitions of the variables used to process the data are as follows.

Results. All calculations with i.d. (quartz tube) = 22 mm, o.d. (high
voltage electrode) = 17 mm, gap = 2.5 mm, length = 100 mm.

&lt;sup>a The relative error is defined as the difference between the
experimental and model conversions divided by the average of both.

Fig. 5. CO2 conversion at different SEI values by changing discharge
power or CO2 flow rate.

Conversion (%) =

(12) 
(13) 

Energy efficiency (%) =

(14) 

3.2.1. Effect of discharge power

As can be seen in Fig. 3, the calculated conversion curve over power
variations seems to satisfactorily represent the experimental data. The
major deviation is found at 50 W (SEI = 120 kJ/l, see Fig. 3), where the
calculated conversion is 0.3% greater (a relative error of 1.3%). It is
expected that higher power values lead to inaccuracies in the model as
it is not able to predict saturation. In fact, a similar behaviour has
been reported previously for SEI figures above 100 kJ/l [31]. However,
the system becomes inefficient beyond that SEI value. The model has been
optimised for the range of parameters that yield relatively high
efficiencies, while deviations are expected to occur outside those
ranges. Indeed, the range of applicability of this model covers the most
relevant operating conditions in terms of energy efficiency. As regards
the conversion of CO2, it is noticeable that values up to around 20% can
be modelled accurately with the current reduced chemistry set, as
opposed to the reported limit of 15% [31]. This difference may be
related to the chosen Polak’s cross sections for the electron impact CO2
dissociation reaction as it affects the relative contribution of the
different processes leading to CO2 splitting.

3.2.2. Effect of flow rate

On the other hand, the model provides acceptable yet less satisfactory
results for the calculations involving different flow rates. In most
cases, the calculated results seem to overestimate the conversion. It
can be seen in Fig. 4 that this positive error is balanced by a negative
error as the flow rate increases. In fact, the conversion for 125 ml/min
is indeed underestimated by 0.6% (relatively, 5.5%). Overall, these
results are deemed to be acceptable in terms of variable flow rate.

3.2.3. Overall results

According to our results, this model has proved to accurately represent
the chemistry of the system up to conversion values of around 20%, with
power values ranging from 10 to 40 W. However, most

calculations at a power of 50 W show slight discrepancies with the
experimental measurements, regardless of the conversion value.

Overall, the proposed model presents a reasonable agreement with the
experimental measurements in terms of conversion for the full range of
experimental measurements taken into account. Thus, this validates the
model and indicates it is reliable enough so as to analyse the reaction
mechanism based on its results (see Section 3.3).

3.3. Reaction pathways analysis

As mentioned above, in this study we employed a reduced chemistry set
for the conversion of developed and reported in [31], consisting of 9
species and 17 reactions (see Table 1). Such simplification may lose
reliability at higher conversion values as the chemistry of the system
becomes more complex and neglected reactions become relevant. However,
it seems that point has not been reached in this study. According to our
results, the entire range of conversion covered by the experiments in
[36] is well reproduced by the calculations yielding a reasonable
agreement in every case.

As the experiments intended to model were performed at atmospheric
pressure and ambient temperature, the initial number density is set to
in all cases. This figures drops to for the highest conversion achieved
(22.7%). The main products of these reactions are CO and , with final
number densities of about and , respectively (also for a conversion of
22.7%). The major by-product is , several orders of magnitude below the
final density of (3.96 1015 cm-3). These results are illustrated in Fig.
6.

3.3.1. Mechanisms for CO2 splitting and recombination

As stated above, the reduced reactions set considered for this study
includes three possible mechanisms for decomposition, namely, electron
attachment (R1), electron impact dissociation (R2) and electron impact
total ionisation (R3). Their relative contributions to the observed
conversion figures will be determined by their rate coefficients which
in turn depend heavily on the cross sections used for each process. As
it has been mentioned, Polak and Slovetsky’s cross sections were used
for the electron impact dissociation [38] while the IST-Lisbon database
available in LXCat were used for the remaining two reactions [45]. With
these cross sections, the BOLSIG+ solver predicts that the highest rate
coefficient is that of the electron impact dissociation, R2 (around for
initial conditions). The electron attachment reaction (R3) has a rate
coefficient of around at initial conditions while that of the total
ionisation

Fig. 6. Number density of CO2, CO and O2 and O3 (25 ml/min and 50 W).

Fig. 7. Reaction rate of main reactions (25 ml/min and 50 W).

(R1) is even an order of magnitude lower (2.9 × 10-14 cm3 s -1). With
these results, it can be concluded that the electron impact dissociation
is the dominant mechanism for CO2 splitting accounting for around 95% of
the conversion. The electron attachment represents the remaining 5%
while the contribution of the total ionisation to the CO2 conversion is
negligible (see Fig. 7 for a comparison between reaction rate values).
This is in qualitative agreement with the results reported by Ponduri et
al. [47], while the relative contribution of each dissociation channel
changes quantitatively. The latter study consists of a DBD time- and
space-dependent fluid model including an exhaustive description of the
vibrational kinetics of CO2. The authors also conclude that the electron
impact dissociation represents the main channel for CO2 dissociation,
accounting for approximately 80% of the CO production. In addition, our
results qualitatively agree with [32,37]. These DBD models predicted a
more balanced contribution of these processes as a result of the cross
sections used [28–31]. It should be mentioned that the study from where
the reduced set of reactions was taken ([31]) used Itikawa’s dataset, as
stated in [32]. As described in Section 2.9, this database has been
proven to underestimate the electron impact dissociation rate
coefficient (compared to the Polak’s dataset to be used in this study),
making its contribution comparable to that of the total ionisation
reaction.

It should be highlighted that the reduced electric field in all these
calculations is 56 Td according to the experimental measurements
(Lissajous figures) [36,42]. This yields an average electron energy of
around 2.21 eV. According to the literature, the contribution of the
total ionisation overtakes that of the electron attachment by several
orders of magnitude at higher E/N values, which are out of the scope of
this work [32].

The CO produced is rather stable in the plasma and therefore it is the
major product of this reaction. Nevertheless, this molecule does take
part in some recombination reactions (R8 and R16). The recombination
with oxygen anions (O−, R8) accounts for 73% of the CO loss processes,
whereas the three-body recombination with O radicals represents the
remaining 27%. See Figure S5 for a comparison between the reaction rates
of minor contributing reactions (excluding R2, R14 and R15).

Regarding O radicals, the recombination with CO molecules (R16) is not
their main consumption mechanism as its rate coefficient is one order or
magnitude lower than that of other processes involving these species.
After an initial prevalence of reaction R13 which builds up an initial
O2 density, reactions R14 and R15 take over. These reactions require an
initial concentration of O2 and O3 to occur and became

Fig. 8. Scheme of the proposed reaction mechanism.

Fig. 9. Energy efficiency at different SEI values by changing discharge
power or CO2 flow rate.

preponderant once achieved. Their reaction rates are almost
indistinguishable from one another, both being in and around ∼ 6 × 1017
cm−3 s -1 (see Fig. 7). These two reactions with high rates explain the
formation of O2 in this chemistry set. The main reaction mechanisms
within this chemistry set are depicted in Fig. 8, where black arrows
represent CO production while blue ones denote O2 production.
Recombination reactions are indicated with red arrows.

3.4. Energy efficiency

A discussion on the energy efficiency of this system is presented in
this section. The values obtained for these experiments and calculations
are presented in Table 2 and shown in Fig. 9. An analysis of the
agreement between the model and the experimental results will not be
included as it is essentially the same as that of the conversion,
already addressed above. By contrast, it is relevant to compare the
efficiency values obtained with what has been previously reported for
CO2 splitting in DBD reactors, as well as to discuss the potential
reasons for the efficiency achieved.

DBD reactors are known for their low efficiency in CO2 splitting
reactions, rarely exceeding 10%. An exhaustive collection of data on DBD
energy efficiency can be found in [26,27]. The values presented in this
work fit within that description and also the decrease in the efficiency
as the SEI grows is also consistent with the literature. A maximum
efficiency of 8.3% was found in this work for a rather low conversion of
17.4%. For higher conversion values, the efficiency drops down to, for
instance, 2.2% at a conversion of 22.7%. The dependence of the
efficiency with the power seems to be somewhat stronger than with the
flow rate. A further analysis of these values can be found in the study
from where the experimental data has been taken [36]. In the next
section, a discussion about the role of the different factors that are
believed to affect the energy efficiency of the CO2 splitting process is
presented (a necessary comparison between MW and DBD discharges is also
included).

3.5. Reduced electric field and vibrationally excited states

As opposed to DBD reactors, MW normally show a greater energy
efficiency, varying from around 10% up to even 90% [26,27] (see the
effect of the operating pressure below). It is often claimed that the
reason for the difference in their efficiencies is the range of reduced
electric fields they work on, placing vibrationally excited states of
CO2 as the main channel for dissociation in MW discharges. While DBD

Fig. 10. Energy loss fractions towards different electron impact
processes as a function of E/N, calculated by BOLSIG+ with the cross
sections used in this study.

reactors have been reported to operate at high reduced electric fields
(E/N), in the order of 200 Td; MW discharges exhibit a smaller E/N,
around 50 Td [31,33]. Indeed, it can be seen in Fig. 10 that most of the
electron energy is consumed towards electronic vibrational excitation
processes at 50 Td, while the relevance of these processes is negligible
at higher E/N. At around 200 Td, the majority of the electron energy is
directed to electron impact excitations (see Fig. 10, calculated by
BOLSIG+ with the cross-sectional data sets used in this work). Then, the
high efficiency of the MW discharges has been associated with the low
E/N figures while the low efficiency in DBD reactors has been linked to
the lack of vibrational excitation due to the higher E/N [28,31,33,34].

However, the latter argument about the lack of vibrational states at
∼200 Td cannot explain the low efficiency of, at least, this DBD
reactor. As mentioned above, the reduced electric field used in this
work is 56 Td, calculated from experimental measurements obtained
through Lissajous Figures (method described in [42] applied to our
previous work [36]). The method employed allows measurement of the
voltage across the gap, importantly excluding the voltage drop through
the dielectric barrier. It is important to notice that this value is in
the order of those associated with MW discharges and differs
considerably from 200 Td, reported elsewhere and thought to characterise
DBD discharges [31,33].

At this point it is important to notice that the high efficiencies
achieved by MW discharges require this reactor to be operated at low
pressure. Moreover, when these discharges are performed at atmospheric
pressure, their efficiency drops significantly to values slightly
greater than those of DBD discharges (for a collection of data from
different experimental works, see [26,27]). Then, it is apparent that
the pressure plays a role in the efficiency of the CO2 splitting
reaction. In this regard, it has been theoretically shown in [51] that
the highest conversions and energy efficiencies of CO2 splitting
reactions performed on MW discharges are achieved at 300 mbar, which is
in agreement experimental results. Moreover, as stated in Section 2.8,
long-lasting large populations of high vibrational states are not
achieved in DBD reactors as the vibrationally excited molecules
thermalise before the next microdischarge occurs, as a result of the
combination of high pressure and low duration of plasma that
characterises these types of discharges [33].

The present work can now be regarded with these very important results
in mind. According to Fig. 10, at 56 Td, most of the energy imparted to
the electrons by the plasma is directed towards vibrational excitation.
For that reason, we believe that vibrational excitation does indeed take
place in DBD reactors, although leading to de-excitation rather than
dissociation, due to the characteristic pressure and plasma duration of
these discharges. Then, the low energy efficiency achieved in this work
(and other DBD discharges) seems reasonable as vibrational excitation
consumes ∼ 90% of the energy imparted by the plasma and is not
translated into CO2 conversion. In other words, ∼ 90% of the energy
given to the system is lost in a vibrational excitation – de-excitation
sequence. Moreover, very little energy (just above 10%) is transferred
to electronic excitation of CO2, which has been shown in this work
(Section 3.3) to be the main contributor to the dissociation process.

Finally, through this discussion, we can validate our approach of
considering vibrational excitations for the calculations of the EEDF,
but not including reactions between vibrationally excited states in the
chemistry set as a channel for CO2 dissociation.

4. Conclusions

In this work, we proposed a novel approach to the already existing
zero-dimensional DBD plasma kinetic models in order to include the
effect of experimental parameters as discharge power and flow rate. In
addition, an average electron density calculated over hundreds of
microdischarges was used as an approximation, resulting in a great
reduction of the computational cost implied within this particular
framework. Our DBD model was applied to CO2 splitting reactions and
contrasted with readily available experimental data covering a range of
power and flow rate figures. A reduced chemistry set for CO2
dissociation reactions was employed [31], together with Polak and
Slovetsky’s cross-sectional data for the CO2 electron impact
dissociation rate coefficient [38].

Overall, the results of this model represent the experimental
measurements accurately within the whole range of operational parameters
tested, with a maximum relative error of around 5.5%. Upon this
validation of the model, the underlying chemistry and reaction
mechanisms involved in the CO2 conversion were analysed. Our results
indicate that, under the operational conditions considered in this work,
the electron impact dissociation constitutes the dominant mechanism for
the CO2 splitting, accounting for 95% of the CO2 conversion. Finally,
some insights on the underlying reasons of the low energy efficiency
shown by DBD reactors are given. Our results, coupled with important
findings published elsewhere [33], suggest that most of the energy input
is wasted towards vibrational excitations that have already been proven
not to lead to CO2 dissociation under conditions of short exposure to
plasma electrons and atmospheric pressure, which characterise DBD
reactors.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge the European Union (EU) and Horizon 2020 funding awarded
under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie action to the EUROPAH consortium (grant
number 722346).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the
online version, at doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2018.07.018.
