Spoke formation in low temperature × plasmas. Transition from gradient-drift instability to ionization wave

J.P. Boeuf a

LAPLACE, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT, UPS, 118 Route de Narbonne,
31062 Toulouse, France

ABSTRACT

Long wavelength plasma non-uniformities rotating in the azimuthal
direction (“rotating spokes”) have been observed in a number of
experiments on Hall thrusters or magnetron discharges. We use a
two-dimensional (2D), axialazimuthal Particle-In-Cell Monte Carlo
Collisions (PIC-MCC) model to study the formation of instabilities in a
direct current (dc) magnetron discharge under conditions close to recent
experiments. In spite of the simplified 2D geometry of the model, the
simulations can reproduce the main features of the experimental results.
At a given position above the cathode, corresponding to the spoke
location, the simulations show large amplitude oscillations of the
plasma density and a very sharp increase of the plasma potential and
electron temperature at the leading edge of the spoke, as in time
resolved probe measurements. Moreover, the simulations show that the
instability evolves in time from a gradient-drift type of instability in
the linear phase, to an ionization wave in the non-linear phase, with
rotation in the + × direction in the first phase and in the − ×
direction in the second phase. The number of spokes is found to increase
with pressure, as in experiments. The mechanisms of electron heating and
the role of the × drift in electron heating and in the coherence and
direction of spoke rotation are discussed.

I. INTRODUCTION

Hall thrusters, magnetron discharges, or Penning discharges1-8 , are low
temperature, partially magnetized plasma devices where electrons are
strongly magnetized while ions are weakly magnetized. The electron
Larmor radius is smaller than the characteristic dimensions of the
plasma while the ion Larmor radius is not. An external magnetic field is
placed perpendicular to the applied electric field or to the discharge
current to increase the electron residence time in the device and allow
ionization and plasma sustainment at low pressures (in the 1-50 mtorr
range) and in relatively small devices (dimensions of a few cms).
Electron confinement is efficient only if the × current is closed on
itself, otherwise the confinement would be destroyed by the Hall effect.
The geometry of these devices is therefore cylindrical, with × in the
azimuthal direction, i.e. axial and radial or the opposite. Electrons
are trapped by the magnetic field and are collisional while ions can be
freely accelerated by the electric field. In regions with large electric
fields, the electron drift velocity in the azimuthal, × direction, is
E/B while ions are accelerated out of these regions before they can
acquire the E/B azimuthal velocity (this is another way to say that
these plasmas are partially magnetized).

The large difference between the azimuthal drift velocities of electrons
and ions can generate charge separation which can lead to the
development of instabilities. One of these instabilities develops when
the electric field and the plasma density gradient are in the same
direction9 (gradient-drift or Simon-Hoh instability). This situation is
very common in × plasma devices such as magnetron discharges3, 4, 10 or
in the channel of a Hall thruster2 . Other types of instabilities can
develop in regions where the electric field and plasma density gradients
are in opposite direction, as in the exhaust region of a Hall thruster
where particle models have shown the formation of an Electron Cyclotron
Drift Instability11-14 .

In this paper we study, with the help of a 2D PIC-MCC model, the
development of instabilities in a direct current (dc) magnetron
discharge, under conditions similar to those of the experimental papers
of Held et al.15 and of Panjan et al.16, 17 . The instabilities in
magnetron discharges take the form of large-scale plasma
non-uniformities rotating in the azimuthal direction and associated with
rotating regions of enhanced light emission and ionization rate. These
rotating ionization regions are generally called “spokes” and were first
mentioned in the context of Hall thrusters by Janes and Lowder18. They
have been more recently evidenced by high speed camera imaging in Hall
thrusters19-24 as well as in magnetron discharges25-32. An interesting
feature of the spoke rotation discussed in several papers17, 28, 31-33
is that the spoke can rotate in the − × direction in low power dc
magnetrons and in the + × direction in high power

1

a Electronic mail: jpb@laplace.univ-tlse.fr

pulsed magnetrons used in plasma processing applications (HiPIMS, High
Power Impulse Magnetron Sputtering5).

Particle-In-Cell Monte Carlo Collisions (PIC-MCC) are now widely used to
study the physics and instabilities in Hall thrusters , magnetron
discharges , and Penning discharges . Two-dimensional (2D)
Particle-In-Cell Monte Carlo Collisions (PIC-MCC) simulations of
magnetron discharges by Boeuf and Takahashi performed under conditions
of dc magnetron discharges similar to those of the experiment of Ito et
al. were able to qualitatively reproduce the formation of spokes and the
rotation.

In the experiments of Held al.15 that are simulated in the present
paper, a Langmuir probe has been used to measure the plasma density,
plasma potential, electron temperature and electron energy probability
function (EEPF) at a given location above the cathode, on the spoke’s
path, and as a function of time. The measurements show sharp increases
of the plasma potential, electron density and plasma density when the
spoke front reaches the probe, followed by a slower decay. The plasma
properties present large amplitude oscillations as a function of time in
the spoke region. The tail of the EEPF presents a sharp increase at the
spoke front, followed by a quick decay. The large potential drop at the
spoke front had been reported in previous experimental works on
magnetron discharges3, 17, 32.

The goal of the present paper is to complement the work of Refs.38, 39
by more detailed (but still qualitative) comparisons with the
experiments of Held et al. 15 and Panjan et al. 16, 17. We compare the
PIC-MCC simulations results with the probe measurements of Held et al.,
and the effect of pressure on the number of spokes with the experimental
results of Panjan et al.. We also describe some interesting results of
the particle simulations, which show that, starting from a 1D PIC-MCC
stable solution of the dc magnetron discharge, the formation of the
instability is consistent with the fluid theory and dispersion relation
of gradient drift instabilities9 in the linear phase but that the
instability evolves into an ionization wave in the non-linear stage. The
phase velocity of the instability changes direction from a direction in
the linear phase, to a direction in the nonlinear phase.

The PIC MCC model is briefly described in section II. The results are
presented and compared to the experimental results in section III.

II. PIC-MCC MODEL AND CONDITIONS OF THE SIMULATIONS

The PIC-MCC model is the same as in Refs. 38, 39.

The simulations are performed in a 2D Cartesian geometry in the plane
defined by the axial and azimuthal directions of the magnetron (see
Figure 1). The curvature of the magnetic field is not taken into account
in this simplified geometry. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the
simulation domain and is supposed to depend on the axial coordinate
only. Periodic boundary conditions are used in the azimuthal direction.

Figure 1: (a) Two-dimensional, axial-azimuthal simulation domain. The
magnetic field is perpendicular to the simulation domain; (b) axial
distribution of the perpendicular magnetic field of the form , with mT
and unless otherwise mentioned; cm is the cathode-anode gap. is the net
current density of secondary electrons emitted by the cathode due to ion
impact and is 0.03 A/m² in all the simulations (uniform along the
cathode surface). The applied voltage is V = 260 V in most simulations.
The positive y direction is downward. The applied field E is in the -x
direction, the magnetic field E in the +z direction and is in the +y
direction.

The 1D version of this 2D PIC-MCC model (J-PIC code, see Ref. 44) has
also been used to study the 1D axial solutions of the same magnetron
discharges, and to provide initial conditions for the 2D simulations.

The cathode-anode gap is cm and the length of the simulation domain in
the periodic azimuthal direction is cm. A voltage of 260 V is applied
between cathode and anode unless otherwise mentioned. The axial profile
of the perpendicular magnetic field is given by:

with mT and in the simulations presented in section III.

Secondary emission due to ion impact is simulated by imposing a uniform
net current density of electrons emitted by the cathode, as in Ref.39
(“net” current density means that each electron coming back to the
cathode is reemitted). The corresponding net secondary electron emission
coefficient under ion impact, , can be deduced a posteriori (ratio of
the ion current at the cathode to the net electron current emitted by
the cathode). For a given, fixed current density the secondary emission
coefficient can therefore depend on the conditions (pressure, voltage
magnetic field), in an unrealistic way. It is clear that care must be
taken in the analysis of parameter studies performed with a constant
instead of a constant but this method allows to limit the plasma density
to values that can be handled by the particle model.

The simulations are performed in argon, at pressure between 0.6 Pa
(close to the pressure in Held et al.15), and 2. Pa. As in Ref.44, the
electron–neutral cross sections used in the simulations are taken from
the siglo database45 of LXCat46 (compilation of Phelps where the
electron excitation levels

are grouped in one single level), and the isotropic and backward
scattering ion–neutral cross-sections for argon are taken from Phelps47.

The number of (x,y) grid intervals is either or depending on the plasma
density (the grid spacing must satisfy , , where is the electron Debye
length). The time step is such that and must be sufficiently smaller
than the minimum cyclotron rotation time around the magnetic field. s
was used in most simulations. The number of particles per cell was
between 30 and 70 in the 2D simulations presented in section III. OpenMP
(Open Multi-Processing) parallelization with particle decomposition is
used and the simulations presented here have been run on 12 or 24
threads.

To study the formation of instabilities, we first perform a 1D PIC-MCC
simulation in the conditions above. The 1D solutions are stable for the
conditions considered in this paper (small amplitude axial plasma
oscillations can be present under some conditions, depending on the
magnetic field profile, plasma density, etc…). We then use the 1D
solution as an initial condition for the 2D simulation. This means that
the initial axial positions and velocities of the charged particles in
the 2D simulations are identical to those of the 1D steady state
solution; the initial azimuthal positions are chosen randomly according
to a uniform distribution. This allows the study of the linear
development of the instability around the unperturbed, stable, steady
state 1D solutions.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISONS WITH EXPERIMENTS

In the first part of this section (III.A) we show the results of 1D
PIC-MCC simulations of magnetron discharges in the conditions described
in section II. We then show (section III.B) the formation of
instabilities in 2D axial-azimuthal simulations with initial conditions
corresponding to the 1D stable solutions, and the transition to the
spoke (ionization wave) regime. The linear phase of the instability is
discussed in section III.C. The spoke regime is described in more detail
in section III.D. Comparisons with probe measurements are presented in
section III.E while considerations about spoke velocity, electron
heating, and the effect of pressure are discussed in sections III.F, G,
and H respectively.

A. 1D PIC-MCC simulations

Figure 2 shows the axial distributions, at steady state, of the charged
particle densities, electric field, electron temperature and ionization
rate obtained with the 1D PIC-MCC model in argon at a pressure of 0.6
Pa, cathode-anode gap =2 cm, applied voltage V=260 V and net current
density of electron emitted by at the cathode due to ion impact A/m².
The perpendicular magnetic field profile is given in Figure 2, with =120
mT. The total electron current density at the anode (close to the
discharge current density) deduced from the simulation is =5.1 A/m².
This gives an electron multiplication = 170 and a net secondary electron
emission coefficient = .

Figure 2: Profiles of the electron density, ion density, electric field
and ionization rate from the 1D PIC-MCC model in argon at a pressure
p=0.6 Pa and with a cathode-anode gap cm and an applied voltage V=260 V.
The net electron density at the cathode is A/m². The axial profile of
the perpendicular magnetic field is shown in Figure 1b and the maximum
magnetic field at the cathode surface is mT.

Assuming that the probability of reflection of an electron coming back
to the cathode to be re-emitted is 0.1, a net secondary emission
coefficient of corresponds to a “real” secondary electron emission by
ion impact , which is a reasonable order of magnitude for argon ions on
a metal cathode48.

We see on Figure 2 the cathode sheath and quasineutral plasma. Because
of the large perpendicular magnetic field and low electron mobility
there is no negative glow and the electric field is large in the
quasineutral plasma. The electron temperature is large, on the order of
10 eV over the whole gap, and the location of maximum ionization rate is
closer to the anode than to the cathode. The plasma density gradient on
the anode side of the maximum plasma density is negative, i.e. of the
same sign as the electric field. This suggests that gradient drift
(Simon-Hoh) types of instabilities can form in this region if the
azimuthal direction is taken into account.

B. 2D PIC-MCC simulations – Transition from gradient drift instability to ionization wave

As said above, the 2D simulations are started with initial conditions
corresponding to the 1D stable solution described in the previous
sub-section. This allows to study the formation of the 2D azimuthal
instability around the stable solution, i.e. in the linear phase, and to
follow the evolution from the linear stage to the non-linear, saturated
stage.

Figure 3: Color contour plots of the time evolution of the ion density
(linear scale) from the 2D axial-azimuthal PIC-MCC simulation in the
conditions of Figure 2 and with the magnetic profile of Figure 1b, mT;
argon, 0.6 Pa, 260 V dc, dimensions (2 cm × 8 cm), A/m2, (256×1024) grid
intervals, time step s; initial conditions from the 1D simulation
results of Figure 2, with charged particle uniformly distributed along
the azimuthal direction. The time is indicated above each contour plot,
and the unit (in m-3) is given in a white rectangle inside each plot.

Figure 3 shows such evolution in the conditions of Figure 2. We see that
the instability forms in about 1 µs. The wavelength of the instability
in the early stage of its development is slightly larger than 1 cm and
increases in time until one single plasma non-uniformity is present in
the azimuthal direction (at about 10 µs).

During the time interval [1-5] s the non-uniformities move in the
direction with a velocity around 8 km/s (the sound speed or argon ion
for an electron temperature of 10 eV – see Figure 2, is close to 4.9
km/s). During this time the growth of the plasma density is not
significant. After time t=4-5 s a well-defined region of larger plasma
density, that we will call “spoke” in the rest of this paper has formed
and the growth of the plasma density due to ionization becomes
significant till time t=40 s. Between t=4 s and t=8 s the spoke velocity
goes through zero and one can observe a reversal of the direction of the
spoke velocity from the to the direction. After t=8 s the spoke moves in
the at a constant velocity slightly smaller than 1.5 km/s and without
significant change in its shape and

maximum plasma density. The motion of the spoke is very regular and
coherent after that time. The simulation has been performed up to
without any significant change in the spoke properties and velocity.

The spoke corresponds to the non-linear, saturated stage of the
instability. We will see below that the non-linear stage of the
instability after t=8 µs corresponds to an ionization wave. Before
studying in detail the spoke properties in the ionization wave regime,
we briefly discuss, in the next subsection, the mechanisms responsible
for the instability and the evolution of the instability from short
wavelengths to larger wavelengths before the spoke formation.

C. Linear stage of the instability – Dispersion relation

Fluid dispersion relations of low temperature partially magnetized
plasma are described in the article by Smolyakov et al. (see also Refs.
43, 49, 50). We consider purely azimuthal perturbations of the density
and potential of the form , where is the complex wave frequency ( ), k
is the wave number in the

azimuthal direction. , the real part of is the wave frequency and is the
growth rate (the perturbation grows when ).

Taking into account drift, diamagnetic drift, magnetic field gradient,
and including electron inertia, gyroviscosity, electron-neutral
collisions and the effect of finite Debye length, the fluid dispersion
relation can be written as 9, 43, 49 (assuming constant electron
temperature):

(1) 

where k is the wave number in the azimuthal direction, is the electron
Larmor radius eB/m, m is the electron mass), is the diamagnetic drift
velocity and , , is the drift velocity, is the ion sound speed (M is the
ion mass) and is the electron-neutral collision frequency. is related to
the magnetic field gradient: with and . The index “zero” in and
indicates equilibrium values (i.e. related to 1D results used as initial
conditions). and depend on the axial position x). Note that with our
notations (see Figure 1 and Figure 2), , so is negative, B is positive,
is negative, and , , and are positive; is negative and and are positive
on the right side of the maximum plasma density in Figure 2, and change
sign on the left side.

The classical collisionless Simon-Hoh instability is obtained in the
limit of small values of (i.e. long wavelength) and small Debye lengths.
This gives:

For small wave frequencies, , this equation has positive complex
solutions, i.e. the instability is growing, when . This corresponds to
conditions where the electric field and the plasma density gradient are
in the same direction and . This is the case in the stable 1D solution
of Figure 2, sufficiently close to the anode where we have ( decreases
close to the anode and is constant). Further away from the anode
increases, becomes negative and the Simon-Hoh mode disappears (the
magnetic field gradient stabilizes the Simon-Hoh mode).

To illustrate this, we can solve the dispersion relation (1) for the
plasma parameters corresponding to a position close to the anode, x=1.8
cm. The parameters corresponding to x=1.8 cm can be obtained from the
data of Figure 2: m-3, V/m, B=6 mT, mm, mm, eV, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,
mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm, mm,

Figure 4: Angular frequency and growth rate of the instability
normalized to the lower hybrid frequency calculated from the dispersion
relation (1), calculate with the plasma and magnetic field parameters
corresponding to the position x = 1.8 cm of Figure 2 ( rd/s). The dashed
line represents the corresponding wavelength of the instability .

The solutions of the dispersion relation at this position, normalized to
the lower hybrid frequency = are shown in Figure 4 rd/s at x = 1.8 cm).
We see on Figure 4 that the instability grows for low values of with a
maximum corresponding to a wavenumber and to a wavelength of about 1.6
cm, consistent with the first phase of Figure 3. At the maximum growth
rate , the wave angular frequency and the phase velocity are
respectively on the order of and 17 km/s (note the sharp variations of
for values of k around in Figure 4). The phase velocity estimated from
Figure 3 was 8 km/s. The increase of the wavelength with time in Figure
3 is due to the deformation of the plasma density and electric field
during the development of the instability.

As said above, the instability triggered at corresponds to a Simon-Hoh
mode that disappears further away from the anode because increases. goes
through zero and changes sign at . Around this point we observe, in the
solutions of the dispersion relation (1), a transition from a Simon-Hoh
mode to a lower-hybrid mode. For small values of the dispersion relation
can be written9, assuming small Debye length and , neglecting the term
in the denominator of eq. (1), and noting that :

For small with respect to , this equation has solutions with positive
growth rate9:

This dispersion relation corresponds to a lower hybrid-mode ( )
destabilized by collisions and flow.

Numerical solutions of the dispersion relation (1) for = 1.7 cm (not
shown here) confirm the transition from a Simon-Hoh or gradient-drift
mode to a lower-hybrid mode, with maximum growth rates significantly
smaller than in Figure 4.

In conclusion we can say that, in the conditions of Figure 3, the
instability develops close to the anode surface through a Simon-Hoh or
gradient-drift mode. The triggering of the instability is however
strongly dependent on the relative values of the characteristic length
of plasma density and magnetic field gradients. For values of the
magnetic field gradient in the anode region smaller than that used in
the conditions of Figure 3, the instability can be triggered by a
lower-hybrid mode destabilized by collisions and × flow. We checked this
numerically (not described here) by decreasing the magnetic field
gradient in the anode region (keeping the same profile in the cathode
region) and found that even in that case the instability evolves into an
ionization wave similar to that of Figure 3, on a long enough time
scale.

D. Rotating spoke regime

We discuss here the steady state spoke regime that takes place after
time t=10 s in Figure 3. The electric potential, electron temperature
and ionization rate at time t=80 s are shown in Figure 5. The potential
wave is correlated with the spoke motion shown on Figure 3. As found in
Ref.39, the spoke is associated with strong distortions of the electric
potential, electron temperature and ionization rate.

Figure 5 : 2D color contour plots of plasma potential, , electron
temperature, , ionization rate, , and ion density, , at time t=80 s. in
the conditions of Figure 3. , , and are plotted on a linear scale (color
bar on the left side), while is plotted on a two-decade log-scale (color
bar on the right side). The potential contours (black lines) are plotted
every 20 V from 0 to 260 V. The unit is 20 eV for the electron
temperature, 1.4 × 1022 m-3 s -1 for the ionization rate, and 2 × 1016
m-3 for the ion density. Three contours of constant ionization rate
(black lines) corresponding to 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 × 1022 m-3 s -1 are
superimposed on the ion density color contour plot. The axial profiles
of the charged particle densities and electric field of Figure 6 are
plotted at the azimuthal positions y1 and y2 indicated by the dashed
lines on the potential plot.

Figure 6 : Axial profiles of the charged particle densities, , , and
electric field , at two different azimuthal locations in the conditions
of Figure 5 (time t=80 s of Figure 3) corresponding to (a), 1 =5.56 cm,
and (b), 2 =1.36 cm. These two azimuthal positions are indicated by
dashed lines on the electric potential plot of Figure 5. Note that the
scales of the plots in (a) and (b) are different.

The word “spoke”, in the context of low temperature × plasmas, is
generally used to refer to the region of intense light emission rotating
azimuthally, which could be due to a local enhancement of the plasma
density or electron temperature (and ionization and light emission) or
both. In the magnetron discharge simulations of Figure 3 and Figure 5,
it appears that the increase of the plasma density is the result of the
local increase of the ionization rate and to the low electric field
region behind the ionization region. In the rest of this paper we use
the word “spoke” in a more general sense, to designate the ensemble
formed by the ionization region (spoke front) plus the region of large
plasma density generated behind the spoke front, and that is clearly
visible in Figure 3 after time t=10 s, and in Figure 5. The spoke is
characterized by a large plasma density (about 2 × 1016 m-3 in the
conditions of Figure 5) and a quasi-constant potential, close to the
anode potential (electrons are trapped in this low electric field
region, hence the high plasma density).

Figure 6 shows the axial profiles of the electric field and charged
particle densities at two different azimuthal locations noted 1 and 2 on
the plasma potential plot of Figure 5. One can see in Figure 6a the
large electric field in the sheath between the cathode and the spoke at
the azimuthal location 1 and the very sharp increase of the plasma
density at the spoke boundary. Outside the spoke in the azimuthal
direction, the electric field penetrates in the quasineutral plasma as
can be seen in the potential plot of Figure 5. The large electric field
in the quasineutral plasma outside the spoke can also be seen in Figure
6b where the axial profiles of the charged particles densities and
electric field are plotted at the location 2 .

The distribution of electron temperature shown in Figure 5 presents an
important maximum at the boundary between the low electric field region
in the spoke and the large field outside the spoke and is larger at the
spoke front, i.e. on the upper side of the potential wave. The
ionization rate is also maximum along the spoke boundary and is slightly
shifted downward with respect to the electron temperature.

The maximum of ionization rate is located on the upper side of the
maximum of plasma density (i.e. in the direction) as can be seen on the
right plot of Figure 5 where the ion density is represented as color
contours and the ionization rate as contour lines. This shows that the
spoke motion is associated with an ionization wave moving in the
direction. One can infer that the velocity of the spoke motion is
related to the position of the ionization rate with respect to the
maximum plasma density. The mechanisms of electron heating, which
control in a large part the space distribution of the ionization rate,
are therefore a determining factor in establishing the speed of the
spoke rotation.

The conditions of the 1D simulation of Figure 2 and of the 2D simulation
of Figure 3, Figure 5, and Figure 6 are identical (same current density
of electrons emitted at the cathode, applied voltage, gas pressure and
electrode gap). It is interesting to note that despite these identical
conditions, the maximum plasma density is about ten times larger in the
spoke of the 2D simulation than in the 1D simulation. Outside the spoke
in the azimuthal direction, the 1D and 2D simulation results present
similar values of the plasma density, and an important penetration of
the axial electric field in the quasineutral plasma (compare Figure 2
and Figure 6b). The much larger plasma density and very small electric
field in the spoke of the 2D simulation are due to the large ionization
rate at the spoke front, which is responsible for the plasma generation
behind the front. Note that despite the much larger maximum plasma
density in the 2D result, the calculated total current density and the
electron multiplication in the 2D simulation (respectively 4.5 A/m2 and
150) are not much different from (and even slightly smaller than) those
of the 1D simulation (respectively 5.1 A/m2 and 170, see above).

Figure 7 shows the 2D distributions of the charge density , of the
electron current density and current lines in the gap, and of the
azimuthal profile of the electron current density on the anode surface
in the conditions of Figure 3, at time t=80 s. The plot of the charge
density shows that a double layer forms at the interface between the low
electric field region in the spoke and the higher electric field around
it. The ion sheath associated with this double layer is clearly visible
on Figure 7, while the negative charge density is more diffuse in the
spoke. The electron current density is maximum in the ion sheath region
of the double layer. This corresponds to maximum values of the and
diamagnetic current density. Note that the electric field is
perpendicular to the equipotential lines so the current density follows
the equipotential lines.

It appears on Figure 7a that the deformation of the plasma potential
associated with the spoke creates a kind of short-circuit between
cathode and anode and is responsible for the transport of a large
electron current from the cathode region to the anode side. This can be
seen on the electron current density profile on the anode surface,
plotted in Figure 7c (note the different scales of the and plots).

Figure 7: 2D distributions of (a) the charge density , (units: ), and
(b) the total electron current density (unit: ); the colour contours
show the intensity of the current density, the white lines show the
current lines; (c) electron current density profile on the anode
surface. Conditions of Figure 3 at time t=80 s.

E.Comparisons with probe measurements

Several experimental papers report probe measurements of the plasma
properties in magnetron discharges. In this section we consider the
recent measurements of Held et al. 15 who used Langmuir probes to
measure the time evolution of plasma potential, electron density,
electron temperature and electron energy probability functions (EEPF) in
dc and pulsed magnetron discharges in the spoke region. The conditions
of the measurements in the dc case (argon, 0.56 Pa, 255 V dc voltage)
are close to those of the particle simulations described above. The
magnetic field distribution used in the simulation (Figure 1b) is only a
rough approximation of the magnetic field in the experiment, based on
Figure 1 of Held et al. 15. The Langmuir probe in the experiment was
placed 6 mm above the cathode surface. The azimuthal period of the
simulations (8 cm) is close to the length of the azimuthal line at the
probe location in the experiment.

The probe measurements of Held et al. are shown in Figure 8. The
measurements exhibit large amplitude oscillations of the electron
density, electron temperature and plasma potential, with a very sharp
increase of the plasma potential and electron temperature when the spoke
reaches the probe. The modulation of the electron density is as large as
70 % and the plasma potential and electron temperature jumps at the
spoke front are respectively on the order of 20 eV and 60 V.

The results of the 2D PIC-MCC simulations are displayed in Figure 9. An
important difference between experiments and simulations that can be
seen by comparing Figure 8 and Figure 9 is that the plasma density is
about ten times smaller in the simulations. This is because the current
density of electrons emitted at the cathode in the simulations has been
imposed (0.03 A/m²) in order to limit the maximum plasma density to
numerically tractable values. Despite this difference, the time
evolution of the plasma parameters in the simulation are qualitatively
similar to those of the experiment.

Figure 8 : Probe measurements by Held et al.15 of the time evolution of
electron density, , electron temperature, , and plasma potential in a dc
magnetron discharge in argon at 0.56 Pa and with a dc voltage of 255 V.
The probe is located 6 mm above the cathode surface on the spoke path.
The gray areas indicate positions where the validity of the electron
temperature and plasma potential are in question (see Held et al. for a
complete description of these Langmuir probe measurements).

The simulation results of Figure 9 exhibit large amplitude oscillations
of the plasma properties with abrupt increase of the electron
temperature, plasma potential, and electron density when the spoke
reaches the location of the numerical probe. The potential jump is
larger in the simulation and, although the minimum and maximum electron
temperature are similar in the experiment and simulation, the detailed
time variations of the electron temperature present some discrepancy
with those of the measurements.

For example, in the experiment, the electron temperature increases very
sharply at the spoke front and decreases more slowly after the front.
This is the opposite in the simulation results where the decay of
electron temperature after the spoke (marked “B” in the electron
temperature plot of Figure 9) is much faster than the temperature rise
just at the spoke front (“A” in the temperature plot). One possible
reason for the sharper electron temperature rise at the spoke front is
the larger plasma density (and smaller Debye length, i.e. thinner double
layer) in the experiment. The temperature after the spoke front quickly
drops to about 3 eV in the simulation (“C” in the electron temperature
plot of Figure 9), and increases again at the trailing edge of the spoke
(“D” in the electron temperature plot). This is consistent with the 2D
plots of the electron temperature in Figure 5).

Figure 9: Time variations of electron density, , electron temperature, ,
and plasma potential from the 2D PIC-MCC simulation, 6 mm above the
cathode surface ( = 6 mm), in the conditions of Figure 3 (argon, 0.6 Pa,
dc voltage 260 V).

The slower decay of the electron temperature in the experiments could be
due to Coulomb collisions, which are not taken into account in the
simulations.

It is interesting to look at the electron energy probability function
(EEPF) in the region of the spoke front and to compare the EEPF deduced
from the simulations, with the EEPF measured by Held et al. 15 (Figure 9
of Ref.15). Figure 10 shows the EEPF deduced from the PIC-MCC
simulations at three different locations around the spoke front. The
tail of the EEPF is strongly modulated in this region. The population of
high energy electrons increases abruptly in the double layer region and
decays in the high plasma density and low field region of the spoke.
This is consistent with the heating of electrons flowing along the
double layer in the spoke front. The residence time of electrons in the
high-density plasma behind the spoke front is long because these
electrons are trapped in this low electric field region. This explains
the fast decay of the electron temperature in the simulations and the
large population of low energy electrons in that region (Coulomb
collisions could reduce this effect).

Finally, we note that the period of variations of the plasma parameters
is shorter in the experiments of Held et al. (about 32 s, see Figure 8)
than in the simulation (60 s, Figure 9). This indicates that the spoke
velocity in the experiments (8 cm in 32 s, i.e. 2.5 km/s) is about twice
the velocity in the simulation (about 1.3 km/s according to Figure 9).

Figure 10: (a) Normalized electron energy probability function (EEPF) at
four different azimuthal locations around the spoke front, 8.8 mm above
the cathode surface ( = 8.8 mm) obtained from the PIC-MCC simulation at
a given time in the conditions of Figure 3. The EEPF are integrated over
squares of 80 m side (indicated on (c)) in space, and over 10 ns in
time; (b) azimuthal profile of the electron temperature at = 8.8 mm in
the conditions of (a) (showing only 4 cm of the 8 cm azimuthal length);
(c) 2D distribution of electron temperature, and (d) of ion density. The
azimuthal locations corresponding to the EEPF of (a) are indicated by
colored squares and numbers on (c), and by lines on (b), with the same
colors and numbers as the EEPF plots on (a). The three white lines on
(d) correspond to contour of constant potential 240, 250, and 255 V.

F. Spoke velocity

The spoke velocity in dc magnetron discharge experiments in argon is in
the − × direction, typically between 0 and 10 km/s, and is found to
increase with increasing current or power (see, e.g., Figure 6 of
Hecimovic and von Keudell32). In the high power, pulsed regime the
spokes rotate in the + × direction with velocities up to 15 km/s32 .

We did not perform a systematic parameter study of the spoke velocity,
but we noticed that the profile of the magnetic field has an influence
on the spoke velocity in the simulation. For example in the simulations
of Boeuf and Takahashi38, 39 where the magnetic field was supposed to
have a Gaussian shape (with a maximum of 100 mT at the cathode surface),
the spoke velocity (in argon) was on the order of 10 km/s. In the
present work we also performed simulations at 0.6 Pa with a magnetic
field profile as in Refs. 38, 39 and a maximum magnetic field of 120 mT
(same conditions as Figure 3 except for the magnetic field profile). The
spoke velocity was about 4 km/s in that case (instead of 1.3 km/s for
the case of Figure 3). Finally, the spoke velocity at a pressure of 2 Pa
in the same conditions as Figure 3 (this case is described in section
III.H below) was 1.5 km/s, slightly larger than the 0.6 Pa case of
Figure 3.

We can conclude that the spoke velocity depends in a complex way on many
parameters (pressure, magnetic field intensity and profile, power,
etc…). This is because the spoke motion is due to an ionization wave and
its velocity depends on the relative distributions of ionization rate
and plasma density. In any case, we can expect that the order of
magnitude of the spoke velocity is also related to the ion mass (through
the ion velocity) since the motion of ions accelerated outside the spoke
front is also a parameter controlling the spoke velocity. More work is
necessary to better understand the parameters controlling the spoke
velocity.

G. Electron heating and role of the × drift

As can be seen in Figure 5, the electron temperature and ionization rate
are maximum in the region of the double layer around the spoke. Electron
heating is therefore larger along the double layer. We showed in
Refs.38, 39 that the electron drift due to the magnetic field gradient
(” drift”) can play an important role in electron heating in magnetron
discharges. The electron drift velocity is given by51 = −1⁄2 ⊥ × / 2 =
−⊥ × / 3 where ⊥ is the electron velocity and ⊥ the electron energy in
eV, perpendicular to the magnetic field. In the conditions of the
simulations considered here (see Figure 1) is directed in the azimuthal
direction, in the positive direction.

The electron heating or cooling per electron due to the drift is given
by:

(5) 

where = ⁄. Considering the direction of the azimuthal electric field
around the spoke that can be deduced from the equipotential contours of
Figure 5, we can conclude that the drift contributes to electron heating
on the upper side of the potential wave ( and are negative in eq. (5))
and to electron cooling on the lower side ( positive, negative). Note
that in the absence of collisions, electron heating and cooling would
cancel each-other because of the adiabaticity of the electron
trajectories. The fact that there is a net heating in our conditions is
due to collisions: electrons can lose energy through inelastic
collisions before drift cooling becomes important.

Non-adiabatic trajectories leading to electron heating is possible when
sharp spatial variations of the electric field such that ||⁄ > are
present52. This situation occurs in collisionless shocks in space
plasmas53-55 . We checked that the condition ||⁄ > is not satisfied in
our simulations where the plasma density is limited because of numerical
constraints.

Figure 11: Comparisons of the 2D distributions of the heating per
electron due to, (a), (b) drift, , eq. (5), with positive contribution
in (a) and negative contribution in (b), and (c), to collisional
heating, , eq. (6); (d), azimuthal profiles at x=1 cm (dashed line of
the 2D contour plots (a), (b), and (c)) of the drift and collisional
electron heating. Note the different scales, in (a), (b), and eV/s in
(c).

This condition could however be reached under the much higher plasma
densities and smaller Debye lengths (i.e. thinner double layer) of high
power magnetrons discharges, leading to larger values of in the double
layer. This question is left for further studies.

Since the electric field is large in the double layer around the spoke,
another possible contribution to electron heating is the classical,
collisional heating. Neglecting the diamagnetic term, the contribution
of collisional heating to the total electron heating can be written as:

where is the electron drift velocity parallel to the electric field.

The contribution of the and (collisional) heating to the total electron
heating in the conditions of Figure 5 are shown on Figure 11. Figure 11a
and Figure 11b confirm that the drift contributes to electron heating on
one side of the potential wave and to electron cooling on the other
side. Collisional electron heating is present all along the double
layer, but its magnitude is significantly smaller than the heating due
to drift. This is also true in the larger pressure condition (2 Pa) of
section III.H. This confirms that the drift plays an essential role in
the spoke formation and sustainment in low power dc magnetron
discharges. Electron heating on the upper side of the potential wave due
to drift and electron cooling on the lower side tend to limit the
ionization region to the upper side, i.e. above the region of large
plasma density. This clearly explains the rotation of the spoke in the
direction and the coherence of the spoke rotation.

To confirm this conclusion, we performed simulations with uniform
magnetic fields, in order to remove the drift

contribution to electron heating. In a previous work36, 37 we also
performed 2D PIC-MCC simulations of magnetron discharges under uniform
magnetic field, but this was done in cylindrical geometry, i.e. with
axial magnetic field and cylindrical cathode and anode. In the
cylindrical configuration as well as in the planar magnetron
configuration (the present work) with uniform magnetic field, the
particle simulation predicts the rotation of plasma nonuniformities in
the direction. These nonuniformities are relatively coherent or much
more chaotic at steady state, depending on the conditions, but they are
never as regular and coherent as the spoke in a magnetic field gradient
described in the present work and in Refs. 38, 39. Moreover, in the
simulations in a uniform magnetic field, we never found conditions where
most of the ionization took place in the spoke (ionization in the
cathode sheath was always dominant). For example, one can see in Figure
9 of Ref. 37 or in Figure 2 of Ref. 36 that ionization in the spoke is a
very small fraction of the total ionization.

H. Influence of pressure

We have seen above that electron heating is larger in the ion sheath
region of the double layer around the spoke, on the upper side of the
potential wave, due to a combination of electron drift and (to a lesser
extent) collisional crossfield transport. Electrons heated in this
region continue flowing in the direction along the ion sheath around the
spoke. They lose energy along this line due to inelastic collisions and
of drift cooling. The mean free path for ionization in the direction can
be estimated as where is the drift velocity and the ionization
frequency. The simulation in the conditions of Figure 3 gives a maximum
of on the order of s-1 in the electron heating region and a drift
velocity between and m/s. This gives a value of the ionization mean free
path between 5 and 10 cm which is on the order of the azimuthal length
in the conditions of Figure 3. It seems reasonable to expect an increase
of the number of spokes as the ionization mean free path decreases,
i.e. as the pressure increases, as discussed by Panjan et al. 16.

This is confirmed by the particle model. PIC-MCC simulations performed
at a pressure of 2 Pa and applied voltage V=280 V (other conditions
being the same as in Figure 3) predict the formation of two spokes in
the azimuthal direction, as can be seen in Figure 12. At 2 Pa, we can
expect an ionization mean free path smaller than at 0.6 Pa by a factor
of about 3. This is consistent with the length of the ionization region
in Figure 12 (2 Pa) compared with Figure 3 (0.6 Pa).

The consequence is that the number of spokes increases with gas
pressure. This has been found in experiments as discussed in detail in
the article by Panjan et al.16.

The electron current density at the anode in these conditions (2 Pa, 280
V) is A/m2, slightly larger than at 0.6 Pa, 5.1 A/m2. This corresponds
to an electron multiplication of 242 and a net secondary electron
emission coefficient of .

Figure 12: 2D color contour plots of plasma potential, , electron
temperature, , ionization rate, , and ion density, in argon at a
pressure =2 Pa and an applied voltage =280 V, all the other conditions
being the same as in Figure 3. , , and are plotted on a linear scale
(color bar on the left side) while is plotted on a two-decade log-scale
(color bar on the right side). The potential contours are plotted every
20 V from 0 to 280 V. The unit is 20 eV for the electron temperature, 3
× 1022 m-3 s -1 for the ionization rate, and 1.5 × 1016 m-3 for the ion
density. The spokes move in the − × direction, as in the 0.6 Pa case.

If the pressure is further increased, the number of spokes continues to
increase. The spokes become closer to each other, and the modulation of
the plasma density decreases. We performed simulations at 3.3 Pa, other
conditions being the same as in Figure 3. At this pressure the spokes
had partially merged, the modulation of the plasma parameters were much
less important and less coherent than in Figure 9 and the plasma
non-uniformities were rotating in the + × direction.

CONCLUSION

Two-dimensional PIC-MCC simulations of a dc magnetron under typical
conditions (argon, pressure between 0.6 and 2 Pa, magnetic field on the
cathode surface of 120 mT decreasing over 2 cm) have been performed to
study the formation and properties of rotating spokes. These simulations
confirm and complement previously published results38, 39, and are
qualitatively compared with recent experiments. The work described in
the present paper can be summarized as follows.

- The results confirm that the magnetic field gradient plays an
  important role in electron heating and in the structuration and
  coherence of rotating spokes in magnetron discharges.

- The spoke is associated with a deformation of the plasma potential
  with equipotential lines oscillating between cathode and anode.

- A double layer forms along the equipotential line separating a region
  of low electric field and high plasma density (the spoke) and a region
  of larger electric field and low plasma density.

- A large × electron current flows along and around this line, and this
  contributes to electron transport across the magnetic field from the
  cathode side to the anode region.

- Electron heating takes place in the double layer, with a dominant
  contribution of drift. Collisional heating is present in the double
  layer but is significantly lower than drift heating.

- drift heating followed by intense ionization takes place on the part
  of the double layer that is “above” (i.e. in the − × direction with
  respect to) the region of large plasma density, while drift cooling
  takes place on the other side. This explains the− × rotation of the
  spoke: the spoke is an ionization wave. The well-defined location of
  the ionization region due to drift heating is responsible for the
  coherence of the spoke rotation.

- By starting the 2D simulations with initial conditions corresponding
  to 1D stable steady state results, one can study the linear and
  non-linear stages of the instability. We find that gradient drift
  instabilities dominate in the linear stage while the instability
  evolves into an ionization wave associated with a spoke in the
  non-linear stage. The rotation of the instability therefore starts in
  the + × direction during the linear stage and changes to − × in the
  nonlinear stage.

- The good qualitative agreement between experimental probe
  measurements15 and simulations tends to confirm the understanding of
  the spoke regime provided by the model.

- The increase of the number of spokes with pressure observed in the
  experiments and attributed to a decrease in the electron mean free
  path16 is also found in the simulations.

- The spoke velocity, although certainly related to the ion mass is a
  complex function of several parameters including magnetic field
  intensity and profile, discharge power, pressure. More work is needed
  to understand this dependence.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.

ACKNWOLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to acknowledge enlightening discussions with A.
Smolyakov on instabilities in × plasmas and associated dispersion
relations.
