accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be
different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

is the author’s peer reviewed,

This

Influence of Temporal Variations in Plasma Conditions on the Electric Potential Near Self-Organized Dust Chains

Katrina Vermillion,1 Dustin Sanford,1 Lorin Matthews,1 Peter
Hartmann,1,2 Marlene Rosenberg,3 Evdokiya Kostadinova,1,4 Jorge
Carmona-Reyes,1 Truell Hyde,1 Andrey M. Lipaev,5,6 Alexandr D. Usachev,5
Andrey V. Zobnin,5 Oleg F. Petrov,1,5,6 Markus H. Thoma,7 Mikhail Y.
Pustylnik,7 Hubertus M. Thomas,7 and Alexey Ovchinin8

(Dated: 27 January 2022)

The self-organization of dust grains into stable filamentary dust
structures (or “chains”) largely depends on dynamic interactions between
the individual charged dust grains and the complex electric potential
arising from the distribution of charges within the local plasma
environment. Recent studies have shown that the positive column of the
gas discharge plasma in the Plasmakristall-4 (PK-4) experiment onboard
the International Space Station (ISS) supports the presence of
fast-moving ionization waves, which lead to variations of plasma
parameters by up to an order of magnitude from the average background
values. The highly-variable environment resulting from ionization waves
may have interesting implications for the dynamics and self-organization
of dust particles, particularly concerning the formation and stability
of dust chains. Here we investigate the electric potential surrounding
dust chains in the PK-4 by employing a molecular dynamics model of the
dust and ions with boundary conditions supplied by a Particle-in-Cell
with Monte Carlo collisions (PIC-MCC) simulation of the ionization
waves. The model is used to examine the effects of the plasma conditions
within different regions of the ionization wave and compare the
resulting dust structure to that obtained by employing the time-averaged
plasma conditions. Comparison between simulated dust chains and
experimental data from the PK-4 shows that the time-averaged plasma
conditions do not accurately reproduce observed results for dust
behavior, indicating that more careful treatment of plasma conditions in
the presence of ionization waves is required. It is further shown that
commonly used analytic forms of the electric potential do not accurately
describe the electric potential near charged dust grains under these
plasma conditions.

I. INTRODUCTION

The self-organization of dust grains in a flowing plasma offers insight
into the interplay among charged species in a complex plasma
environment. In a complex plasma, micrometersized particles (also known
as dust) acquire charge due to interactions with ions and electrons. The
resulting charge on a dust grain is typically negative in the absence of
secondary thermionic or photoelectric emission due to the high mobility
of electrons compared with the much more massive ions. Ground-based
experiments have studied the formation of dust structures in the sheath
region of a plasma1, where a large vertical electric field is required
to balance the gravitational force acting on the dust particles. Ions
drift relative to the more mas-

sive dust grains, with the ion drift velocity ( ) corresponding to the
strength of the applied electric field. The trajectories of ions in the
vicinity of a charged dust grain are deflected, leading to the build-up
of ions downstream from the dust grain, forming a region of enhanced ion
density called an ion wake. The presence of positively charged ion wakes
is thought to be responsible for the non-reciprocal interactions that
have been observed between negatively charged dust grains in a flowing
plasma2,3.

In contrast, microgravity dusty plasma experiments performed on
parabolic flights4 or on the International Space Station (currently
through the Plasmakristall-4, PK-4, experiment)5-10 enable
investigations of dust dynamics in the near-absence of gravitational
influence, where the smaller effects from the dust-dust, dust-ion, and
drag forces are the primary drivers of the dust motion. In microgravity
experiments, the dust cloud can be levitated within the bulk of the
discharge

1) CASPER, Baylor University, One Bear Place 97316, Waco, TX,
76798-7316, USAa)

&lt;sup>2) Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, Wigner Research
Centre for Physics, PO Box 49, H-1525 Budapest, Humany

&lt;sup>3)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093, IISA

&lt;sup>4)Department of Physics, Leach Science Center, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, 36849,

5) Joint Institute for High Temperatures, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Izhorskaya 13/19, 125412 Moscow,

&lt;sup>6)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Institutsky Lane
9, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region 141700, Russia

&lt;sup>7)I. Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gieβen,
Heinrich-Buff-Ring 16, 35392 Gieβen,

8) Gagarin Research and Test Cosmonaut Training Center, 141160 Star
City, Moscow Region,

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 1. Illustration showing the qualitative behavior of the shielding
ion cloud surrounding dust grains as the alternating axial electric
field strength ( Ez) increases. In the top row, representing Ez = 0, the
shielding cloud is spherical and close to the dust grain. In the middle
row, representing a moderate increase in Ez, the shielding ion clouds
begin to stretch in the axial direction. In the bottom row, representing
Ez above a critical value, the ion clouds are even more distorted and
stretch across the entire region between individual dust grains.

plasma where electric fields are weaker, and ion flow speeds are lower,
than typically found in a plasma sheath. In order to confine the dust
within the field of view, the polarity of the DC discharge of the PK-4
device undergoes polarity switching at a frequency ωpi > ωps > ωpd
(where ωpi is the ion plasma frequency, ωps is the polarity switching
frequency, and ωpd is the dust plasma frequency). As a result, the
regions of enhanced ion density are symmetrically stretched along the
direction parallel to the external electric field (illustrated in Fig.
1). This allows for a more detailed examination of the interaction
between dust grains and the surrounding plasma environment, especially
as it relates to the formation of dust particle chains, dust density
waves, and other interesting phenomena which have previously been
reported11–15. The complex interactions between ion wakes and the
charged dust grains are thought to guide the homogeneous-to-string
transition16–19, resulting in behavior similar to that observed in
conventional electrorheological (ER) fluids20.

Recent ground-based observations of ionization waves under the
conditions present in the PK-4 experiment have been reported21, and the
impact that these observed ionization waves can have upon the plasma
parameters of interest for dust chain formation suggest that further
investigation is warranted. PIC-MCC simulations of the plasma at 40 Pa
found that the ions thermalized with the neutral gas between ionization
fronts, with a large increase in the ion drift velocity associated with
the passing of an ionization wave22. Previous work investigated the
effect of the large axial electric field associated with the ionization
waves on the stability of the dust chains using numerical simulations of
the dust charging and dynamics in the thermalized plasma22. The results
were obtained by increasing the applied electric field, representing
different possible averages of the electric field, while the temperature
and density of electrons and ions were unchanged. The increased electric
field strengths imposed a drift velocity on top of the thermal motion of
the ions obtained from the average plasma conditions between ionization
wave peaks, while the use of constant ion and electron temperatures and
plasma densities resulted in a constant shielding length for all
electric field strengths considered. It was found that the electric
field strength corresponding to the ionization wave front was more
favorable to dust chain formation than a homogeneous plasma described by
the average plasma conditions.

In this work, the behavior of dust and ions in the PK-4 experiment at 60
Pa is investigated in order to match the conditions used in later
experimental campaigns. PIC-MCC simulations of the plasma at 60 Pa found
that the thermal velocity of ions in the plasma remained about 12%
higher than expected if the ions were to thermalize with the neutral
gas, and electron and ion temperatures were found to vary
continuously21. As a result, the current investigation was designed to
incorporate the variations in electron and ion temperatures and plasma
densities, which allows the effect of changing screening length on the
resulting dust chains to be probed. The simulation of the ion and dust
dynamics also allows examination of the electric potential near
interacting charged dust grains in the case of an anisotropic plasma
with ion-neutral collisions. The configuration of the electric potential
gives insight into the stability of the dust structures formed in the
dynamic plasma context.

This paper is organized as follows. An overview of the PK-4 Experiment
and the PIC-MCC model of the PK-4 discharge are given in Section II. A
discussion of the plasma conditions selected for examination in the MD
model of the dust and ions are given in Section III. The MD model for
dust and ions is described in Section IV, and includes details regarding
the treatment of ions, dust dynamics, and dust grain charging.
Comparison of the resulting dust structure, electric potential, and ion
wake effects at different time periods within ionization waves are
presented in Section V, with a discussion of the results in Section VI
and concluding remarks in Section VII.

II. BACKGROUND

The Plasmakristall experiments have allowed the study of
three-dimensional complex plasmas in microgravity since

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

their first introduction on board the Mir space station in the late
1990’s23. The most recent iteration, the PK-4, has implemented a long
axial DC discharge tube (instead of the compact radio-frequency, RF,
plasma used in previous iterations of the Plasmakristall experiments) to
further aid investigations of the liquid state of complex plasmas23.
This section will introduce the PK-4 experiment on the ISS and the
PIC-MCC model of the PK-4 DC plasma21 .

A. PK-4 ISS Experiment

The PK-4 experiment on the International Space Station consists of a
30-mm-diameter π-shaped cylindrical glass tube, high voltage power
supply, RF coil which can be moved along the tube axis, dust dispensers,
and both manipulation and illumination lasers. The central portion of
the main tube is used for imaging by a plasma glow observation camera as
well as particle observation cameras. A diagram of the PK-4 experimental
setup is included for reference in Fig. 2. In the particular experiment
analyzed in this work, the dust is trapped within the field of view of
the observation cameras using polarity switching of the DC electric
field. A more detailed description of the PK-4 experiment and
capabilities can be found in [9].

B. PIC Model of PK-4

Previous theoretical results of dust dynamics have been obtained using
the assumption that the positive column of the discharge plasma is
homogeneous along the axial direction on timescales relevant to the dust
dynamics24. Although DC plasma discharges are known to contain
self-excited oscillations over a large range of frequencies and varied
plasma conditions25, the frame rates used to record the PK-4 ISS glow

FIG. 2. Diagram of the PK-4 ISS experimental setup illustrating the
π-shaped discharge tube and relative locations of the particle
observation cameras (C1 and C2), field of view (FoV), dust dispensers
(D1-D6), and the active and passive electrodes. Dispenser 5 (D5), shown
highlighted in red, was used in the experiment modeled here to inject
dust particles of diameter 3.38 µ m .

limit observations to those processes which occur on ms or longer
timescales 9 . Video data collected from the PK-4 experiment appears to
be homogeneous, though the presence of fast-moving ionization waves
cannot be excluded.

The 2D particle-in-cell with Monte Carlo collisions (PIC-MCC) model26 of
local plasma parameters in the PK-4 system used in [21] revealed the
presence of fast-moving ionization waves with a phase velocity in the
range of 500 − 1200 m/s. The PIC-MCC model uses the simplified geometry
of a 400 mm-long straight discharge tube with an inner diameter of 30
mm, and the cathode and anode placed at each end.

The PIC-MCC simulation was validated against the ground-based experiment
BUD-DC, which has a straight cylindrical discharge closely matching the
simplified geometry used in the PIC-MCC model while keeping the system
as close as possible to the PK-4 in terms of discharge tube diameter,
gas type, and range of pressures21. Experimental data collected from the
BUD-DC with an exposure time of 40 ms shows that global discharge
structure and current dependence are properly captured by the PIC-MCC
simulation. However, the PIC-MCC simulation also revealed the presence
of fast-moving ionization waves. This finding was confirmed by discharge
light emission sequences collected using a high-speed CCD camera with
frame rates of 50 ,000 fps in a second ground-based experiment, the PK-4
BU. The PK-4 BU is a ground-based replica of the PK-4 consisting of a
30-mm-diameter π-shaped cylindrical quartz-glass tube, a power supply
capable of operation in polarity switching mode with switching
frequencies up to 1 000 Hz, and a movable RF coil27 .

C. Results from PIC Model of PK-4

The main feature revealed by the PIC-MCC model is that conditions within
the positive column of the PK-4 discharge lead to large, fast-moving
ionization waves occurring on timescales on the order of 10 kHz. The
local plasma parameters within the ionization waves vary by as much as
an order of magnitude from the time-averaged values, as shown in Fig. 3.
Further, the frequency of the ionization waves is high enough to prevent
the ions from thermalizing with the neutral gas between subsequent peaks
of the ionization waves, which results in continuously varying plasma
conditions. This is in contrast with the PIC-MCC results obtained at 40
Pa used for the simulation in [22], where the regions between ionization
waves were shown to be relatively homogeneous and punctuated only by
brief variations in plasma conditions.

The heating of electrons and ions (Fig. 3a) is accompanied by large
variations in the axial electric field (Fig. 3b), followed by a
depletion of both ions and electrons as the ionization wave passes (Fig.
3c). The time delay between peaks in the different plasma parameters is
logical, considering that the charge separation provided by the
imbalance of electrons and ions produces the large electric field
observed in the ionization wave. This offset between maximum and minimum
values in various parameters leads to interesting consequences for the
formation of ion wakes and dust structures, and will be

04 June 2025 13:23:02

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online
version of record will be different from this version once it has been
copyedited and typeset

discussed below.

D. Implications for String Formation

Previous investigations of dust particle chain formation have focused on
time-averaged plasma parameters due to the dust particle’s large inertia
and, therefore, large response time compared with other plasma species11
(with dust typically moving on a millisecond timescale while ions
respond on a microsecond timescale). However, as illustrated in Fig. 3,
ionization waves in the plasma lead to large oscillations in the axial
electric field, plasma number densities, and the electron and ion
temperatures (based on the mean kinetic energies) on a microsecond
timescale21, which in combination impact the formation of ion wakes in
complex plasmas. Since the character of the ion wake changes
dramatically, further investigation is needed to determine if this is
translated into the dust motion.

Interactions between dust grains and a flowing plasma have been
characterized using the Mach number, , where is the ion drift velocity
and is the ion sound

FIG. 3. Results from the PIC-MCC model illustrating time-varying (a)
electron and ion temperatures, and , (b) axial electric field, , (c)
electron and ion number densities, and , (d) the ratio of to , and (e)
the Mach number, M. The associated time-averaged value of the parameters
are indicated by a dashed line corresponding to the values K = 4.32 eV,
V/m, m-3, and , respectively. The dot-dashed line in (d) corresponds to
. The vertical red line in each panel marks the time of the first peak
in temperature. Discharge parameters are: neon gas, pressure = 60 Pa,
current = 2 mA.

speed (as in [28]). The Mach number (representing the ion flow speed) is
shown in Fig. 3e. Previous investigation of intergrain forces in
low-Mach plasma wakes using a particle-incell code28 found that wake
enhancements were not present when the flow velocity is less than ,
given (as is the case in the current investigation, shown in Fig. 3a).
Moreover, it was noted that grain-aligning forces would be negligible
and likely would not be responsible for the formation of dust chains at
low Mach numbers. As shown in Fig. 3e, the range of ion flow speeds
found are all much less than this threshold value suggesting that, in
this case, the dust should be unlikely to form strings. However, results
from PK-4 experiments show that the modeled conditions do lead to the
formation of long (tens of particles) stable dust strings, suggesting
that the established criteria for string formation may be incomplete.

METHODS

A. Data Selection

The current investigation seeks to isolate the influence that the
changing plasma conditions have on the stability of dust chains. In this
study we model a small volume within the dust cloud, focusing on the
dynamics of a single chain of 20 dust grains with a radial confinement
force designed to mimic the effect of surrounding dust chains. The
structure of the electric potential surrounding the dust chain,
including the contributions from the charged dust grains and the
localized concentrations of ions, is examined at different times within
the ionization wave. The electron and ion temperatures, which influence
dust grain charging and the ion dynamics, reach values within ionization
waves that are two to six times the background values (see Fig. 3 a and
c). The plasma densities also impact the formation of wake structures
around the charged dust grains, which in turn influences both the
formation and the stability of the dust chain. The axial electric field
(Fig. 3b) which drives the ion flow leading to wake formation and dust
chain stability, reaches peak values in the ionization waves as large as
20 times the value between peaks. Evidently, each of these parameters
impact stability and formation of dust chains, and the specific
contribution from any individual component could be difficult to
isolate. However, the time offset between peak values seen in Fig. 3
results in the plasma parameters varying in time with respect to each
other, which allows for closer observation of the impact each parameter
may have.

Specific regions from the time history are selected based on the
behavior of the electric field for the present investigation. The plasma
conditions within the identified regions of interest are used in the MD
simulation to investigate their effect on string formation, and results
are subsequently compared to dust dynamics where the full time-averaged
plasma conditions are used. The different plasma conditions are: Case
(1) Full Time Average, where the values of each parameter averaged over
a time span (440 µs) covering several ionization waves are considered:
Case (2) Between Ez Peaks, where only data between the large peaks in
the axial electric field are

This

04 June 2025 13:23:02

is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online
version of record will be different from this version once it has been
copyedited and typeset PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI:
10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 4. Results of the PIC-MCC model showing (as a solid line) the
time-varying (a) electron temperature, , (b) axial electric field, , and
(c) electron number density, . The data points selected for the various
averaging schemes are denoted by: Between Ez Peaks (dark green circles),
Rising and Minimum (medium green squares), and FWHM Ez Peaks (light
green x’s). For comparison, the Full Time Average value of each variable
is shown as a dashed horizontal line extending over the full extent in
each plot.

considered, representing a region of minimum ion flow; Case (3) Rising
and Minimum , where data within the rise of the axial electric field are
considered, corresponding to a time when electron and ion number
densities are depleted; Case (4) Full-Width Half-Maximum Ez Peaks, where
the data is averaged over the FWHM of peaks in the axial electric field,
representing the maximum ion flow. A representative time interval
indicating the data selected for each of the averaging cases is
illustrated in Fig. 4, and the resulting averaged plasma parameters for
each case are listed in Table I.

IV. SIMULATING DUST AND ION MOTION

The numerical model used to simulate the dust and ion dynamics is DRIAD
(Dynamic Response of Ions And Dust). This model is described in detail
in [29], and here we provide only a brief overview of the components
relevant to the current investigation. DRIAD is a molecular dynamics
simulation which resolves dust and ion motion each at their own relevant
timescales using a timestep of seconds for the dust and seconds for the
ions.

The motion of ions and dust grains are governed by their respective
equations of motion. For an ion of mass , the equation of motion is
given by

(1) 

The electrostatic force between ions i and j, , is derived from a Yukawa
potential, where the electrons provide shielding, resulting in the
expression

where denotes the charge of particle i(j), denotes the distance between
particles i and j, is the electron Debye length with , , and e
representing the temperature, number density, and charge of electrons,
respectively. The force on the ions due to dust grains, , is derived
from a Coulomb potential (as the electrons are depleted in the vicinity
of the negatively charged dust30)

where the sum is taken over the d dust grains, represents the charge on
the dust grain, and is the distance between an ion (i) and dust grain
(d). The treatment of ion-dust and ion-ion forces follows the Molecular
Asymmetric Dynamics (MAD) code developed by Piel30, previously shown to
yield reasonable results for potential distributions and interparticle
forces when compared to PIC simulations. In the asymmetric treatment of
dust and ions, the force on the ions by the charged dust are calculated
with the bare Coulomb potential while the force on the dust by the ions
is calculated using a shielded Yukawa interaction to bridge the limiting
cases of motion close to a dust grain where (and electrons are
depleted), and sufficiently far from the dust grain that and ions are
shielded by electrons.

The force on the ions due to the external axial electric field, , which
switches directions at the polarity switching frequency of 500 Hz, is .
The ions outside the simulation region exert a force on the ions within
the simulation through . The electric field due to ions outside the
simulation region, , is calculated as the negative gradient of the
potential in a cylindrical cavity, found by numerical calculation of the
potential of uniformly distributed ions within a cylinder, which is then
subtracted from a constant potential. The ion-neutral collisions are
treated using the null-collision method31,32, with the isotropic and
backscattering cross section collision data taken from the Phelps
database (hosted by LXCat project)33

The equation of motion for a dust grain with mass is given by

(4) 

The force of ions on the dust grains, , is calculated from a Yukawa
interaction, similar to Eq. 2. At each dust timestep, the cumulative
force of ions acting on a dust grain is averaged over the elapsed ion
timesteps. The force between dust grains, , is a Coulomb interaction,
similar to Eq. 3, as the screening by ions is included in the expression
for . The axial electric field provides a force . The drag force, , is
the neutral gas drag. The dust is immersed in a thermal bath which is
implemented using the force .

This

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

TABLE I. Plasma parameters used for each of the four averaging cases. Note that +(-) values for and indicate parallel (anti-parallel) orientation relative to the tube axis.

The confinement force, , simulates the effect of neighboring dust chains
outside the simulation region. The confinement is included using the
expression

where the confining strength, is proportional to

(6) 

with and representing the expected average dust charge and inter-grain
separation estimated from results in the PK-4 experiment. The constant C
is used to scale the confining force provided by surrounding chains, and
is based on the expected inter-chain spacing and average dust grain
charge. To aid in comparison, the value of was set to the same value for
each of the four cases considered , and the confinement force of Eq. 5
is ultimately proportional to the charge on a dust grain in the
simulation.

In the experiment, the confinement force would be provided by discrete
dust grains present in the neighboring dust chains. Although the
influence from individual dust grains does lead to a “ripple” in the
resulting potential along the axial direction, simulation of the Yukawa
potential resulting from regularly spaced neighboring dust chains
revealed maximum deviations from a smooth potential to be on the order
of a few hundredths of a mV. The use of a smooth confinement force is
therefore considered to be a reasonable approximation for the current
investigation.

Note that no axial confinement force is imposed by the simulation other
than the polarity switching of the axial electric field. The dust grains
are allowed to spread in the z-direction to reach their equilibrium
axial interparticle spacing.

The dust grain charging in DRIAD is in response to electron and ion
currents; as the electrons are not modeled directly, they are assumed to
be Boltzmann-distributed, and the electron current, , is calculated
using orbital motion limited (OML) theory:

where , , and are the electron density, mass, and temperature,
respectively, is the Boltzmann constant, and

is the surface potential of the dust grain. The ion current is comprised
of ions which cross the ion collection radius, ,

6

is the characteristic velocity of the ions

and is the drift speed of an ion, which may conveniently be reported as
a fraction of the sound speed . Calculating the electron current using
the OML theory and the ion current by tracking the number of ions
collected by each dust grain results in a charge that is different from
the OML theory in that (1) the charge is affected by the ion flow, (2)
the ion current to the dust grain is enhanced as a result of ion-neutral
collisions, and (3) the inhomogeneity in the ion distribution is
naturally taken into account. The results of the DRIAD simulation are
found to be consistent with predictions based on OML theory which have
been corrected to account for flowing ions and the presence of
ion-neutral collisions22.

V. RESULTS

Dust charging and dynamics for 20 dust grains were simulated using the
plasma conditions shown in Table I for each of the four cases. All of
the simulations used neon gas with neutral gas pressure p = 60 Pa,
neutral gas temperature T = 295K, electric field polarity switching
frequency of 500 Hz, dust radius , and dust mass density corresponding
to that of melamine formaldehyde (1.51 g/cm3). The simulation region is
a cylinder of radius 840 µm and length 8050 m, which provides enough
space for the dust grains to reach the expected average interparticle
spacing determined from the PK-4 experiment with at least one electron
Debye length between the axial ends of the simulation and the outermost
dust grain. Dust grains are prevented from leaving the simulation region
by a strong confinement force at the simulation boundaries. The dust was
initially placed in a region roughly 450 m in diameter near the center
of the simulation region. The dust cloud expanded, and was allowed to
evolve

is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online
version of record will be different from this version once it has been
copyedited and typeset This

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

for 1.2 seconds, with the dust in each case reaching equilibrium after
approximately 1.0 seconds. The dust configuration in each case was found
to be stable during the final 200 ms (which covers at least 2 dust
plasma periods , where and dust number density m-3), and the final 100
ms of data was used for the results presented below. The same plasma
conditions used in Cases 1 - 4 of Table I were also used to model a
single stationary dust grain, where only dust grain charging and the
motions of ions are considered. The ion density and electric potential
near the isolated dust grains are compared with those from the
simulation results for the chains formed by the dynamic dust grains, and
relevant results are provided in the following sections. The final
average grain charges and interparticle separations are listed in Table
II. The magnitude of the grain charge increases with the electron
temperatures and the ion flow speed, which also leads to a greater
interparticle separation due to the stronger repulsion between grains.
However, there is not a linear relationship between the grain charge and
interparticle spacing, due to the distribution of ion density and the
resulting electric potential, as explained below.

A. Ion Density

The ion densities averaged over the final 0.1 seconds for each of the
four cases simulating 20 moving dust grains are shown in Fig. 5. Note
that the plot is zoomed in on the central part of each chain so that the
details in the radial direction are visible. The dust grains are shown
as grayscale dots, where the color of the dot indicates the magnitude of
the distance from the xz-plane (out-of-plane direction), with black
indicating dust grains positioned in the xz-plane and white indicating a
displacement of 0.25 , the maximum out-of-plane distance found at
equilibrium. The colorbar indicates the ion density normalized to the
background ion density far from the dust, , where values for for each
case are given in Table I. From the data shown in Fig. 5, it is clear
that the different cases lead to different ion wake structures, as
expected since the extent and location of an ion wake formed in the
presence of a charged dust grain depends on the external electric field
and resultant ion drift velocities.

In Case 1 (which uses the full time average of plasma parameters, Fig.
5a) and in Case 2 (which is averaged over the minimal external electric
field between ionization wavefronts, Fig. 5b), the dust forms a somewhat
aligned chain with most of the disorder seen in the out-of-plane
direction, and the large ion density maxima centered around the dust
grains. In Case 3 (averaged over the rise in external electric field,
Fig. 5c), the ion density maxima are less intense and are elongated
between the dust grains, and the chain structure shows considerably less
displacement out-of-plane. Case 4 (averaged over the FWHM peaks of the
external electric field), Fig. 5d, shows results similar to that of Case
3, with even greater enhancement of ion density between grains. The
results shown in Fig. 5 lead to two broad classifications of the four
averaging cases: low ion flow with distinct ion clouds collected around
each

FIG. 5. Plot of ion density for (a) Case 1: Full Time Average, , (b)
Case 2: Between Peaks, , (c) Case 3: Rising and Minimum , , (d) Case 4:
FWHM Peaks, . The colorbar corresponds to the ion density normalized to
the background ion density far from the dust: . The shade of the dust
grain indicates distance along the y axis (in or out of the page), with
black indicating dust grains positioned in the xz-plane and white
indicating dust grains 0.25 from the xz-plane. The three concentric
white circles in each plot indicate the distances 2, 4, and 6 from the
location of one of the dust grains.

dust grain (as in Cases 1 and 2), and high ion flow resulting in
elongation and merging of the ion clouds (as in Cases 3 and

The various ion and electron temperatures and plasma densities result in
a different ion Debye length for each of the four averaging cases
examined (the Debye lengths for each case are provided in Table II).
Using the white circles (indicating radii of 2, 4, and ) in Fig. 5 as a
guide, it is evident that a significant transition has occurred between
Cases 1 and 2 and Cases 3 and 4. In Cases 3 and 4, the average
interparticle spacing is smaller ( 5-6 ) than in Cases 1 and 2 ( 7-8 ).
The close proximity of dust grains with respect to the ion Debye length
in Cases 3 and 4 are paired with a smearingout of the ion density
enhancement along the axial direction, while the more isolated dust
grains in Cases 1 and 2 correspond to highly localized regions of ion
density enhancement.

B. Electric Potential

The simulation results for the electric potential have a large variation
in the background potential along the z-axis, illustrated in Fig. 6a, as
the ions accumulate near the dust chain and normalized ion density is
near unity at the ends of the chains. This overall variation in the
background potential is expected to be an artifact of the simulation,
and is eliminated by subtracting a fit to the potential along a line
parallel to the z-axis at a radial distance of . At this distance the
axial potential profile is essentially unaffected by the presence

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset. PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI:
10.1063/5.0075261

TABLE II. Size of the cylindrical simulation region expressed in Debye
lengths, final average interparticle spacing, and final average dust
grain charge for each case.

of the dust grains (as defined by the normalized ion density being equal
to one). The total potential of the ions and dust (indicated by a solid
line) and the fit to the background potential (indicated by a dot-dashed
line) are shown in Fig. 6a. The resulting potentials along the z-axis
are shown in Fig. 6b, and the more uniform potential along the z-axis
allows for a direct comparison between the four averaging cases
considered.

The electric potential data, a combination of the negatively charged
dust and positive ion wakes, φ = φion + φdust, averaged over the final
0.1 seconds are shown in Fig. 7 for each of the four cases with 20
moving dust grains. As in Fig. 5, the view is zoomed in on the central
portion of the chain to show the detail in the radial direction, and the
grayscale color of the dust grains indicates the distance from the
xz-plane (out of the page). The relative scale of ion Debye lengths for
each case are indicated by the concentric black circles surrounding the
central dust grain, with radii corresponding to 2, 4, and 6λDi. Each
case shows a negative potential well at the dust grain locations, with
the extent and depth of the potential well

FIG. 6. Plots showing (a) the total electric potential from the DRIAD
simulation along the z-axis (solid lines) and the fit to the axial
potential taken at a radial distance of 9λDi from the z-axis (dashed
lines), and (b) the resulting total electric potential after subtracting
the fit to the axial potential. The horizontal black line indicates the
level V = 0 in both plots.

FIG. 7. Plots showing electric potential for (a) Case 1: Full Time
Average, (b) Case 2: Between Ez Peaks, (c) Case 3: Rising Ez and Minimum
n i , (d) Case 4: FWHM Ez Peaks averaging cases. The shade of the dust
grain indicates distance from the y-axis (out of the page), with black
indicating dust grains positioned on the xz-plane and white indicating
dust grains farther from the xz-plane. The three concentric black
circles in each plot indicate the distances 2, 4, and 6 λDi from the
location of one of the dust grains.

correlated to the magnitude of the charge on the dust grain, which
increases with ion flow speed. The maximum positive potential is located
between 3-5 λDi from a dust grain, and moves closer to a grain as the
spacing of the dust grains (in ion Debye lengths) decreases. The
magnitude of the positive potential between dust grains in Case 3 (Fig.
7c) is ≈ 75% larger than Case 1 (Fig. 7a) and ≈ 30% larger than in Case
2 (Fig. 7b). Case 4 (Fig. 7d), which corresponds to the largest dust
grain charge, has positive potential values ≈ 90% and ≈ 40% larger than
Cases 1 and 2, respectively.

The large interparticle spacing in Case 1 (Fig. 7a) relative to the ion
Debye length results in minimal overlap of the potential from individual
dust grains, allowing the form of the overall potential structure to
closely resemble that of an isolated dust grain. In contrast, the close
proximity of dust grains relative to the ion Debye lengths in Case 3 and
Case 4 (Fig. 7c and d, respectively) lead to interesting behavior that
dif-

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 8. Plot of g(r) pair correlation functions for (a) Case 1: Full
Time Average, (b) Case 2: Between Ez Peaks, (c) Case 3: Rising Ez and
Minimum n i , (d) Case 4: FWHM Ez Peaks averaging cases.

fers from a simple superposition of the electric potential from each
individual dust grain, which will be discussed further in Section VI.

C. Chain Structure

The final average interparticle spacing in each case are indicated in
Table II measured in µm, λDe, and λDi. The final interparticle spacing
found in Case 1 (representing the timeaveraged plasma conditions) was
345 µm, which is larger than the 230 µ m average interparticle spacing
observed in the experiment. Cases 3 and 4 also have larger interparticle
spacing (363 and 370 µ m, respectively) than that observed in the
experiment. Case 2 most closely matches the experiment with d = 246 µ m.
It is evident that using the time-averaged plasma conditions results in
an over-prediction of the particle charge and a correspondingly large
interparticle spacing.

To characterize the order seen in the dust chains in each case, the pair
correlation function, g r) = ( ∑ i 6= 0 δ ( ~r − ~ri ) / ρ , where ρ =
(number of particles) /(volume), was calculated for each averaging case,
shown in Fig. 8. The pair correlation functions are calculated for the
central 12 dust grains using the dust positions over the final 0.1
seconds of simulation time. Order is indicated by well-defined, sharp
peaks in the g ( r ) function at distances corresponding to integer
multiples of the average interparticle spacing. As shown in Fig. 8, the
greatest correlation is seen for Cases 3 and 4 (which correspond to
smaller interparticle separation measured in Debye lengths). Cases 1 and
2 show the least order in the g ( r ) function, which correlates with
the increased disorder in the out-of-plane direction noted in these
cases and larger interparticle separation measured in Debye lengths.

The pair correlation functions also allow for comparison between the
DRIAD simulation results and results obtained from microgravity
experiments. Parameters used for the cur-

FIG. 9. Results from analysis of video data obtained during Campaign 7
of the PK-4 ISS experiment showing (top panel) chains chosen for
analysis and (bottom 3 panels) the corresponding pair correlation
functions for the three selected chains, averaged over 30 frames. Colors
used to highlight chain particles in the top panel correspond to the
color of the g ( r ) function in the bottom three panels.

rent simulation closely match experimental conditions during Campaign 7
of the PK-4 experiment, which were 70 Pa neon gas, 0.7 mA current, 500
Hz electric field switching frequency, and 1.69 µm radius dust grains.
Video data were collected at 71.4 fps, from which 2D images of the dust
cloud were analyzed using particle tracking over 90 frames. Three chains
comprised of 11 dust grains each were selected from the dust cloud, and
are highlighted in the top pane of Fig. 9. These particular chains were
selected for analysis because they were similar in length to those
analyzed in the simulation and remained intact over the entire time
interval. The pair correlation functions for the three selected chains
were calculated and averaged over 30 frames (equivalent to ≈ 420 ms),
and results are shown in the bottom three panes of Fig. 9. The color of
the pair correlation plots in the bottom three panes of Fig. 9
correspond to the color used to highlight the dust grains in the image
of the dust cloud shown in the top pane.

Qualitatively comparing the results in Fig. 9 with those in Fig. 8, the
shape of the first five nearest neighbor peaks in the pair correlation
function obtained from experimental data most closely match the results
in Case 3 (which is averaged over the rise in external electric field)
and Case 4 (which is averaged over the FWHM peaks of the external
electric field). The plasma conditions in Cases 3 and 4 lead to the
greatest order in the dust chains. Although the average interparticle
spacing seen in Case 2 is closer to the PK-4 experimental results, the
chain formed in Case 2 shows little order compared with the long range
order seen in the experimental results.

Physics of Plasmas

is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online
version of record will be different from this version once it has been
copyedited and typeset

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

VI. DISCUSSION

The structure of the ion wake around dust grains has been shown to
impact the formation and stability of dust chains in a complex
plasma20,29. From the g(r) plots it is apparent that Cases 3 and 4 have
undergone a transition to a more ordered structure than that found in
the results from Cases 1 and 2. The increase in order is correlated with
the transition from spherical, isolated ion density clouds surrounding
the dust in Cases 1 and 2 to the ion density enhancement becoming more
uniform along the length of the dust chain (parallel to the electric
field), and decreased interparticle spacing relative to the ion

The increased interparticle spacing in the simulated results (Fig. 8)
when compared with the experimental results (Fig. 9) is likely due to
increased dust charge due to lower dust number density in the DRIAD
simulation. The visualized portion of the experimental dust cloud used
for analysis in Fig. 9 contains 347 dust particles in a 2.5 mm × 15 mm
window, and is illuminated by a laser sheet with a FWHM extent that
varies between 40-220 µm (characterized in [9]). This yields a dust
number density within the PK-4 ISS experiment on the order of , while
Langmuir probe measurements in the dust-free discharge9 show an electron
density on the order of . The charge on dust grains in microgravity
conditions at 60 Pa are theoretically estimated in [34] to be ,
indicating that as much as 50% of the electrons present in the dust
cloud reside on the dust grain surface. It is therefore logical to
conclude that the neighboring dust chains present in the experiment lead
to a decrease in the electron density within the dust cloud (dependent
on the dust number density) that is unaccounted for in the current
simulation. If this depletion of the electrons were taken into account,
the charge on the dust grains in the simulation conditions would be
reduced. However, even with this limitation, the qualitative behavior of
the pair correlation function seen in the experiment most closely
matches the simulation results in Cases 3 and 4.

Models describing the electric potential surrounding charged particles
in a plasma are useful for both planning experiments and analyzing their
results, but the assumptions used in the derivation of a given model and
its range of applicability must be carefully considered. The large
variation of ion density, electric potential, and the resulting order
characterized by g(r) in Cases 2-4 from the full time average plasma
conditions in Case 1 suggest that electric potential models which are
based on averaged plasma conditions may not fully describe the
environment in the PK-4 experiment with the presence of the recently
observed ionization waves.

A. Comparison with Common Electric Potential Equations

The simplest model for the electric potential surrounding a point charge
is the Coulomb potential (Eq. 3). This form of potential is only
dependent on the distance r from the point charge, and therefore fails
to capture any effects resulting from local non-neutrality of the charge
distribution close to

a dust grain. To account for the changes in charge distribution near a
dust grain, it is necessary to use the slightly more complex form of
electric potential developed by H. Yukawa35 which is typically adapted
for use in the field of complex plasmas as the Yukawa potential (Eq. 2).
The Yukawa potential (also sometimes referred to as a Debye-Hückel
potential) is dependent not only on the distance from the point charge,
but also on the temperature and number density of the charged species
within the plasma through the term in the expo

While the Yukawa potential does improve upon the Coulomb potential by
taking into account the shielding provided by mobile charges in the
plasma, it fails to account for the changes in potential structure that
arise from a flowing plasma. A potential model based upon the
Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook collision operator has been developed by R.
Kompaneets36, which has the form

where , u represents the drift velocity, , and represents the angle
between and the direction of ion drift. This form has been adapted to
account for the symmetric ion wake present in a plasma subjected to an
alternating external electric field (as in [37]), yielding the form
referred to here as the Multipole Expansion Potential:

where is defined as the “thermal” Mach number, and represents the angle
between the external electric field driving the ion drift and .

The analytic forms of the electric potential were developed by
considering either a single, isolated probe or the interaction between
two probes separated by large distances (relative to the ion Debye
length). The development of the Multipole Expansion potential relies on
the underlying assumption that the thermal Mach number is small ( ) and
that the distance from the dust grain is much larger than the ion Debye
length , as well as the assumptions inherent in the BGK collision
operator, namely that the collision frequency is velocity independent
and only charge exchange collisions are considered.

To compare directly with the analytic potential forms, the plasma
conditions used in Cases 1 - 4 were applied to a single, stationary dust
grain located at the origin. The plasma conditions in the four cases are
identical to those from Table I, discussed in Sections III and IV, with
the only change being that the dust grain does not move. The ion density
data from the single, stationary dust grain simulations are shown

Publishing

is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the online
version of record will be different from this version once it has been
copyedited and typeset This

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 10. Results from simulations of a single dust grain in plasma
conditions corresponding to Case 1: Full Time Average (a and b), Case 2:
Between Peaks (c and d), Case 3: Rising and Minimum ni (e and f), and
Case 4: FWHM Ez Peaks (g and h). The total electric potential (left
column) from simulations (solid red line) is compared with the Coulomb
Potential (dotted yellow line), Yukawa Potential (dot-dashed green
line), and Multipole Expansion potential (dashed blue line). The ion
density (right column) values are normalized to the background ion
density for each case, which are (b) Case 1: , (d) Case 2: , (f) Case 3:
, and (h) Case 4: .

in the right column of Fig. 10. The magnitude of ion density enhancement
surrounding the dust grains is largest for Case 2 (Fig. 10d), as is the
case for the simulations containing 20 dust grains. However, asymmetry
in the ion density enhancement in Case 3 (Fig. 10f) and Case 4 (Fig.
10h) is much less pronounced than in the 20 dust grain simulations (Fig.
5a and b, respectively). This result suggests that it is the interaction
between closely spaced neighboring dust grains (relative to the scale of
) in addition to the plasma conditions which lead to the formation of
the elongated ion wake structures found in Cases 3 and 4 (Fig. 5c and d,
respectively), and not the result of the plasma conditions alone.
Simulation results for the electric potential of a single stationary
dust grain along the axial direction are shown in the left column of
Fig. 10, and compared to the analytic potential forms.

In all four cases it is seen that the Yukawa potential and Multipole
Expansion potential agree more closely with the simulation results and
with each other than does the Coulomb potential. However, both the
Yukawa and Multipole Expansion forms predict a more negative potential
than that obtained from the simulation results within a distance . Fig.
10 shows that the difference between the Coulomb potential and the other
potentials decrease as increases, while the difference between the
Yukawa potential and Multipole Ex-

FIG. 11. Comparison of the simulation results for a single, isolated
dust grain (top row: a, b, c, and d) with the Coulomb Potential (second
row: e, f, g, and h), Yukawa Potential (third row: i, j, k, and 1), and
the Multipole Expansion Potential (bottom row: m, n, o, and p). The
conditions used for the single grain simulations correspond to the
conditions in Table I for Case 1 (first column), Case 2 (second column),
Case 3 (third column), and Case 4 (fourth column). The black circles in
the bottom row (m-p) correspond to the radial distance of from the dust
grain, which is indicated by the gray cross (‘+’) in each plot.

pansion potential decreases with decreasing Mach number. To account for
the breakdown in the validity of the Multipole Expansion form of the
potential as , the region has been omitted from the line plots in Fig.
10. The Coulomb potential predicts a larger negative potential than the
simulation results due to the lack of an exponential shielding term.

Contour plots showing comparisons between the potential forms and
simulation results from each of the four averaging cases with single,
stationary dust grains are shown in Fig. 11. The region corresponding to
from the dust grains is indicated on plots Fig. 11m-p by the black
circles, which correspond to the minimum radial extent considered valid
for the Multipole Expansion potential in Eq. 12. The asymmetry in the
Multipole Expansion potential for Cases 3 and 4 (thought to contribute
to the transition to flow-aligned dust chains6) is evident only within
the region , which is excluded by the requirement that distance be much
larger than the ion Debye length.

One may ask how applicable these results are to the case where more than
one dust grain is present, and whether the case of multiple dust grains
may be adequately represented by a superposition of the potentials of
many single dust grains. To address this question, the results of the
simulations with

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 12. Comparison of the superimposed single dust grain simulation
results (dotted pink line) with the 20 dust grain simulation results
(solid red line), Coulomb Potential (dotted yellow line), Yukawa
Potential (dot-dashed green line), and the Multipole Expansion Potential
(dashed blue line). Results are shown for (a) Case 1, Full Time Average,
(b) Case 2, Between Ez Peaks, (c) Case 3, Rising Ez and Minimum n i ,
and (d) Case 4, FWHM Ez Peaks .

20 moving dust grains are compared with the Coulomb potential, Yukawa
potential, Multipole Expansion potential, and with the single dust grain
simulation results superimposed at each of the 20 dust grain locations,
shown in Fig. 12. The Multipole Expansion Potential is shown only in the
regions farther than 2 λDi from any dust grains, to accommodate the
restricted range of validity of this potential form. As expected, the
Coulomb potential form shows the greatest deviation from the simulation
results for a 20 dust grain chain, with a more negative potential
between dust grains for all of the plasma conditions examined. The
agreement between the superposition of single dust grain potentials
(dotted pink line) and the potential from the 20 dust grain simulation
(solid red line) is best for Case 2 (with the lowest axial electric
field, ion drift velocity, and dust grain charge). The agreement worsens
as the axial electric field, ion drift velocity, and dust grain charge
increase, a finding which is consistent with previous studies of the
interaction between dust grains with anisotropic ion wakes20,38 .

Contour plots of the electric potential comparing the results from the
simulations of 20 dust grains with the Yukawa and Multipole Potential
forms are provided in Fig. 13. The simulation results in Fig. 13a-d
correspond to the results shown in Fig. 7, zoomed in on a smaller axial
range to allow for closer comparison with the analytic potential forms.
The Yukawa potentials corresponding to each of the four averaging cases
are shown in Fig. 13e-h, and contour plots of the Multipole Expansion
potential are shown in Fig. 13i-l. The region corresponding to 2λDi from
the dust grains is indicated on plots Fig. 13i-l by the black circles,
which correspond to the minimum radial extent considered valid for the
Multipole Expansion potential in Eq. 12.

12

Careful consideration of the results shown in Fig. 13 makes it evident
that the simulation results are not adequately described by the
expressions for dust potential using the Yukawa potential or the
Multipole Expansion potential given by equation 12. The comparison
between a 3D PIC simulation and the numerical solution of linearized
electrostatic potential carried out in [39] showed that the charge and
potential of the downstream grains can be significantly modified by wake
effects in a system of several grains, and the wake pattern can show
significant deviation from the potential determined from a linear
combination of a wake behind a single grain in subsonic flows. These
results are supported by the results presented in Fig. 12, where it is
seen that the linear superposition of single dust grain potentials
deviates from the simulation of 20 dust grains for ion sound speeds as
low as 0.07 M (corresponding to Case 4). These findings also correlate
with the comparison shown in Fig. 13, where it is seen that the
potential for the dust strings is not well represented by the models
developed for isolated grains.

Many stable self-organized dust structures have been observed in
ground-based and microgravity plasma environments, but the available
models for electric potential have been found to be not well suited for
describing the interactions between large numbers of dust grains.
Further description of the electric potential structure is needed, given
that the dynamics of charged species within a complex plasma and the
form of electric potential are inextricably linked, and will be the
focus of a forthcoming study.

B. Dust Grain Charging

The time a dust grain takes to reach equilibrium charge ( ∼60-100 µ s)
is longer than the time it takes for an ionization wave to pass (∼50 µs
peak-to-peak), meaning that the actual dust charges will differ from
those shown in Table II. As a simple model for the dust grain charging
and de-charging during the various phases in ionization waves, we may
consider the dust grain to be a spherical capacitor and evaluate the
charging and de-charging time as a dust grain transitions between the
plasma conditions in Cases 2, 3, and 4. Simulation results show that
time to reach the new equilibrium charge after transitioning between
cases was found to be 60-100 µ s , with the longest time taken when
transitioning from the conditions in Case 4 to the conditions in Case 2
(which has the

accepted manuscript. However, the online version of record will be
different from this version once it has been copyedited and typeset is
the author’s peer reviewed, This

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

FIG. 13. Comparison of electric potential from the simulation (top row,
a-d) with the analytic potential forms discussed in Section VI: the
Yukawa Potential is shown in the middle row (e-h), and the Multipole
Expansion Potential is shown in the bottom row (i-l). The first column
on the left (a, e, and i) shows Case 1 (Full Time Average), the second
column (b,f, and j) shows Case 2 (Between E, Peaks), the third column
(c, g, and k) shows Case 3 (Rising and Minimum ), and the fourth column
(d, h, and l) shows Case 4 (FWHM Peaks). Positions of dust grains are
marked with a gray cross (+). Black circles in i-l indicate the radius
from dust grains.

longest ion plasma period, shown in Table I).

As a rough approximation for the expected equilibrium charge for dust
grains exposed to evolving plasma conditions due to ionization waves, a
simple capacitor model was used to calculate the charge on a dust grain
as a function of time as the grain charged or discharged in the plasma
conditions associated with Cases 2-4. This model was used to generate
the piece-wise charging curve shown in Fig. 14. The final average
charges in Cases 2-4 are shown as dot-dashed horizontal lines in shades
of green, and the average equilibrium charge reached by the capacitor
model in evolving conditions is shown as a dot-dashed horizontal pink
line. The piece-wise charging curve is shown by the thick solid line,
with the color of the line segments corresponding to charging following
the transition from Case 4 to Case 2 (dark purple), the transition from
Case 2 to Case 3 (dark pink), and the transition from Case 3 to Case 4
(light pink). Over 40 (the approximate peak-to-peak time for the
ionization waves), the charge fluctuates on the order of , with a
time-averaged charge of 2150 e-, which is lower than the charge
predicted by Case 1. This lower charge would result in smaller
interparticle spacing, more closely matching that observed in the
experimental data (Fig. 9). However, it is important to note that this
simple model is based upon constant conditions present within snapshots
in time of dynamically varying plasma conditions, and as such may vary
from the equilibrium charge found in an experimental environment. In
light of the impact fluctuating charges will have on the formation and
stability of dust structure, future investigations utilizing time
varying plasma parameters are needed to further quantify the impact
ionization waves have on dust dynamics in the PK-4 environment.

FIG. 14. Plot indicating the charge over time on a dust grain undergoing
transitions between Cases 2, 3, and 4. The color of the solid line
segments in the charging curve indicates the particular transition, with
dark purple corresponding to charging following the transition from Case
4 to Case 2, dark pink corresponding to charging following the
transition from Case 2 to Case 3, and light pink corresponding to
charging following the transition from Case 3 to Case 4. The vertical
dotted black lines indicate the transitions, and horizontal dotdashed
lines indicate the final equilibrium charge in dark green for Case 2
(2040 e-), medium green for Case 3 (2270 e-), light green for Case 4
(2630 e-), and pink for the average charge resulting from transitions
between Cases 2-4 (2150 e-).

VII. CONCLUSION

Varying conditions within the ionization waves present in the PIC-MCC
simulation of conditions within the PK-4 ISS21

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

have a significant impact on the formation of dust chains. The effect of
fast-moving ionization waves on the formation of ordered dust particle
chains and the resulting electric potential structure has been
investigated by first identifying regions of interest within the time
evolving plasma conditions (shown in Fig. 4), labeled as the four cases:
(1) Full Time Average, where the values of each parameter are averaged
over a time span (440 µs) encompassing several complete ionization
waves; (2) Between Ez Peaks, where only the data in the interval between
the large peaks in the axial electric field are considered, representing
a region of minimum ion flow and a steady, constant plasma column; (3)
Rising Ez and Minimum ni , where the data within the rise of the axial
electric field are considered, corresponding to an interval where
electron and ion number densities are depleted; and (4) Full-Width
Half-Maximum Ez Peaks, where the data is averaged over the FWHM of peaks
in the axial electric field, representing the maximum ion flow. The
specific plasma parameters identified for each case (listed in Table I)
were then modeled using DRIAD, a molecular dynamics simulation capable
of resolving dust and ion motions on each of their respective
timescales, and results for the ion density (Fig. 5), electric potential
(Fig. 7), and analysis of the final dust structure (Fig. 8) have been
presented for each of the four cases.

Although considered separately in this investigation, it is important to
recall that the conditions of Cases 2, 3, and 4 represent different
features within the ionization waves, with each case describing an
interval of 10-20 µ s within a full ionization wave (with peak-to-peak
interval of ≈ 40 µs), while the relevant dust dynamics occur on a
timescale of 100 µs. As such, in the time-evolving experimental system,
the decreased ion wake structure and diminished order for Case 2 (Fig.
5b and 8b) is immediately followed by the enhanced wake and order found
in Case 3 (Fig. 5c and 8c). As the ionization wave moves past a dust
chain, conditions between ionization wave peaks (minimum ion velocities
and maximum ion density) lead to an increase in ion current and
subsequent decrease in the magnitude of charge on the dust grains, which
allows dust grains to move closer together. As the wave continues past
the dust grains (with increased ion velocities and minimum ion density),
the increased ion focusing leads to an enlarged region of positive
potential between dust grains is the largest. Even though the average
charge on dust grains increases during this phase, the large positive
potential in the strongly focused ion wake allows for smaller
interparticle spacing relative to the shielding length, as well as
increasing the grain alignment. As shown in Fig.8 c-d, this leads to the
largest order in the resulting dust chain. The lower particle charge
found using the capacitor charging model (Fig. 14) allows for the
smaller interparticle spacing, which more closely matches the
experiment, while the enhanced ion wakes during the ionization waves
contributes to the stability of the chain.

The balance between the various parameters is not captured by the full
time average (Case 1), and as such, it is likely that the full time
average does not provide an accurate representation of the conditions to
be used to model dust dynamics. Additionally, further work is needed in
modeling the effect of ions through a modification of the potential of
charged dust grains, as the current analytic models do not match the ion
behavior.

14

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Support for this work from NSF grant number 1740203, NASA grant number
1571701, and the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of
Fusion Energy Sciences under award number DE-SC-0021334, and by the
National Office for Research, Development, and Innovation of Hungary
(NKFIH) via grant 134462 is gratefully acknowledged. All authors
gratefully acknowledge the joint ESA - Roscosmos “Experiment
Plasmakristall-4” on-board the International Space Station. The
microgravity research is funded by the space administration of the
Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt eV with funds from the federal
ministry for economy and technology according to a resolution of the
Deutscher Bundestag under Grants No. 50WM1441 and No. 50WM2044. A. M.
Lipaev and A. D. Usachev were supported by the Russian Science
Foundation Grant No. 20- 12-00365 and participated in preparation of
this experiment and its execution on board the ISS. Color schemes used
for figures 7, 11, and 13 were derived from Paul Tol’s notes at
(personal.sron.nl/ ∼pault).

The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful ideas and suggestions made by
the reviewers which led to interesting improvements to the manuscript.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.

- 1R. Kompaneets, U. Konopka, A. V. Ivlev, V. Tsytovich, and G. Morfill,
  Physics of Plasmas 14(5), 052108 (2007).
- 2A. V. Ivlev, M. H. Bartnick, C. R. Du, V. Nosenko, and H. Lowen,
  Physical Review X 5(1), 011035 (2015).
- 3O. V. Kliushnychenko and S. P. Lukyanets, Physical Review E 95,
  012150 (2017).
- 4M. H. Thoma, H. Höfner, M. Kretschmer, S. Ratynskaia, G. E.
  Morfill, A. Usachev, A. Zobnin, O. Petrov, and V. Fortov, Science and
  Technology 18(3-4), 47 (2006).
- 5V. Fortov, G. Morfill, O. Petrov, M. Thoma, A. Usachev, H.
  Hoefner, A. Zobnin, M. Kretschmer, S. Ratynskaia, M. Fink, K.
  Tarantik, Y. Gerasimov, and V. Esenkov, Plasma Physics and Controlled
  Fusion 47(12B), B537 (2005).
- 6A. V. Ivlev, M. H. Thoma, C. Räth, G. Joyce, and G. E. Morfill,
  Physical Review Letters 106(15), 155001 (2011).
- 7A. G. Khrapak, V. I. Molotkov, A. M. Lipaev, D. I.
  Zhukhovitskii, V. N. Naumkin, V. E. Fortov, O. F. Petrov, H. M.
  Thomas, S. A. Khrapak, P. Huber, A. Ivlev, and G. Morfill,
  Contributions to Plasma Physics 56(3-4), 253 (2016).
- 8M. H. Thoma, S. Mitic, A. Usachev, B. M. Annartone, M. A. Fink, V. E.
  Fortov, H. Hofner, A. V. Ivlev, B. A. Klumov, U. Konopka, M.
  Kretschmer, G. E. Morfill, O. F. Petrov, R. Sutterlin, S. Zhdanov,
  and A. V. Zobnin, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 38(4), 857
  (2010).
- 9M. Y. Pustylnik, M. A. Fink, V. Nosenko, T. Antonova, T. Hagl, H. M.
  Thomas, A. V. Zobnin, A. M. Lipaev, A. D. Usachev, V. I.
  Molotkov, O. F. Petrov, V. E. Fortov, C. Rau, C. Deysenroth, S.
  Albrecht, M. Kretschmer, M. H. Thoma, G. E. Morfill, R. Seurig, A.
  Stettner, V. A. Alyamovskaya, A. Orr, E. Kufner, E. G. Lavrenko, G. I.
  Padalka, E. O. Serova, A. M.

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

Samokutyayev, and S. Christoforetti, Review of Scientific Instruments
87(9), 093505 (2016). 10H. M. Thomas, M. Schwabe, M. Y. Pustylnik, C. A.
Knapek, V. I. Molotkov, A. M. Lipaev, O. F. Petrov, V. E. Fortov, and S.
A. Khrapak, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 61(1), 014004 (2019).
11O. Arp, J. Goree, and A. Piel, Physical Review E 85(4), 046409 (2012).

- 12A. V. Zobnin, A. D. Usachev, O. F. Petrov, V. E. Fortov, M. H.
  Thoma, and M. A. Fink, Physics of Plasmas 25(3), 033702 (2018).

- 13K. Takahashi and H. Totsuji, IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science
  47(8) 4213 (2019).

- 14M. Y. Pustylnik, B. Klumov, M. Rubin-Zuzic, A. M. Lipaev, V.
  Nosenko, D. Erdle, A. D. Usachev, A. V. Zobnin, V. I. Molotkov, G.
  Joyce, H. M. Thomas, M. H. Thoma, O. F. Petrov, V. E. Fortov, and O.
  Kononenko, Physical Review Research 2(3), 033314 (2011).

- 15C. Dietz, J. Budak, T. Kamprich, M. Kretschmer, and M. H. Thoma,
  Contributions to Plasma Physics , e202100079 (2021).

- 16A. M. Lipaev, V. I. Molotkov, A. P. Nefedov, O. F. Petrov, V. M.
  Torchinskii, V. E. Fortov, A. G. Khrapak, and S. A. Khrapak, Journal
  of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 85(6), 1110 (1997).

- 17V. E. Fortov, A. P. Nefedov, V. M. Torchinsky, V. I. Molotkov, O. F.
  Petrov, A. A. Samarian, A. M. Lipaev, and A. G. Khrapak, Physics
  Letters A 229 (5), 317 (1997).

- 18A. Melzer, V. A. Schweigert, I. V. Schweigert, A. Homann, S. Peters,
  and A. Piel, Physical Review E 54(1), R46 (1996).

- 19A. Melzer, V. A. Schweigert, and A. Piel, Physical Review Letters
  83(16) 3194 (1999).

- 20A. V. Ivlev, G. E. Morfill, H. M. Thomas, C. Räth, G. Joyce, P.
  Huber, R. Kompaneets, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev, V. I. Molotkov, T.
  Reiter, M. Turin, and P. Vinogradov, Physical Review Letters 100(9),
  095003 (2008).

- 21P. Hartmann, M. Rosenberg, Z. Juhasz, L. S. Matthews, D. L.
  Sanford, K. Vermillion, J. C. Reyes, and T. W. Hyde, Plasma Sources
  Science and Technology (2020).

- 22L. S. Matthews, K. Vermillion, P. Hartmann, M. Rosenberg, S.
  Rostami, E. G. Kostadinova, T. W. Hyde, M. Y. Pustylnik, A. M.
  Lipaev, A. D. Usachev, A. V. Zobnin, M. H. Thoma, O. Petrov, H. M.
  Thomas, and O. V. Novitskii, (under consideration for publication
  in J. Plasma Phys.) (2021),

- arXiv:2107.10367.

- 23G. Morfill, Y. Baturin, and V. Fortov, Plasma Research at the Limit:
  From the International Space Station to Applications on Earth
  (Imperial College Press, 2013).

15

- 24G. I. Sukhinin, A. V. Fedoseev, S. N. Antipov, O. F. Petrov,
  and V. E. Fortov, Physical Review E 87(1), 013101 (2013).
- 25K. Rohlena, T. Ruzicka, and L. Pekarek, Czechoslovak Journal of
  Physics B 22, 920 (1972).
- 26Z. Donkó, A. Derzsi, M. Vass, B. Horváth, S. Wilczek, B. Hartmann,
  and P. Hartmann, Plasma Sources Science and Technology 30(9), 095017
  (2021).
- 27J. Schmidt and T. W. Hyde, Review of Scientific Instruments 91(8),
  083506 (2020).
- 28I. H. Hutchinson, Physical Review E 85(6), 066409 (2012).
- 29L. S. Matthews, D. L. Sanford, E. G. Kostadinova, K. S. Ashrafi, E.
  Guay, and T. W. Hyde, Physics of Plasmas 27(2), 023703 (2020).
- 30A. Piel, Physics of Plasmas 24(3), 033712 (2017).
- 31H. R. Skullerud, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 1(11), 1567
  (1968). 32Z. Donko, Plasma Sources Science and Technology 20, 024001
  (2011).
- 33E. Carbone, W. Graef, G. Hagelaar, D. Boer, M. M. Hopkins, J. C.
  Stephens, B. T. Yee, S. Pancheshnyi, J. van Dijk, and L. Pitchford,
  Atoms 9(16), 41 (2021).
- 34T. Antonova, S. A. Khrapak, M. Y. Pustylnik, M. Rubin-Zuzic, H. M.
  Thomas, A. M. Lipaev, A. D. Usachev, V. I. Molotkov, and M. H. Thoma,
  Physics of Plasmas 26, 113703 (2019).
- 35H. Yukawa, Proceedings of the Physico-Mathematical Society of Japan
  17 48 (1935).
- 36R. Kompaneets, Complex plasmas: Interaction potentials and
  non-Hamiltonian dynamics, Ph.D. thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
  (2007).
- 37A. V. Ivlev, P. C. Brandt, G. E. Morfill, C. Räth, H. M. Thomas, G.
  Joyce, V. E. Fortov, A. M. Lipaev, V. I. Molotkov, , and O. F. Petrov,
  IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science 38(4), 733 (2010).
- 38V. Yaroshenko and M. Pustylnik, Molecules 26 (308), 11 (2021).
- 39P. Ludwig, W. J. Miloch, H. Kählert, and M. Bonitz, New Journal of
  Physics 14, 053016 (2012).

04 June 2025 13:23:02

AIP Publishing

Physics of Plasmas

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

PLEASE CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261

04 June 2025 13:23:02

This is the author’s peer reviewed, accepted manuscript. However, the
online version of record will be different from this version once it has
been copyedited and typeset.

-0.1 -0.05 0 (a) Duplicated Single Grain Potential 20 Grain Potential
Coulomb Potential Yukawa Potential Multipole Expansion Potential -0.1
-0.05 0 (b) (c) -10 -5 0 5 10 -0.1 -0.05 (d) [V] Z position [ Di] PLEASE
CITE THIS ARTICLE AS DOI: 10.1063/5.0075261
